Beware of entering the crowd! Remember thirty poor persons were pressed to death by the crowd when Haggerty and Holloway were executed!
He throws his hands far from him, and shouts aloud, 'Mercy, good Lord! mercy is all I ask. The Lord in His mercy come!
There! there! I see the Lamb of God! Oh! how happy! Oh! this is happy!
After judgment was passed she repeatedly cried out Shame!
The crowd was for a moment awed and stilled by the quiet rapid passage from life to death!
He wrote, quote, The Communist Party of the United States has betrayed itself!
Printing, then, for our purpose, may be considered as the art of making books by means of movable types.
A further development of the Roman letter took place at Venice.
This was notably the case with the early works printed at Ulm, and in a somewhat lesser degree at Augsburg.
In fact Gunther Zeiner's first type (afterwards used by Schussler) is remarkably like the type of the before-mentioned Subiaco books.
In the Low Countries and Cologne, which were very fertile of printed books, Gothic was the favorite.
The characteristic Dutch type, as represented by the excellent printer Gerard Leew, is very pronounced and uncompromising Gothic.
Most of Caxton's own types are of an earlier character, though they also much resemble Flemish or Cologne letter.
In spite, however, of his praiseworthy efforts, printing had still one last degradation to undergo.
The seventeenth century founts were bad rather negatively than positively.
But for the beauty of the earlier work they might have seemed tolerable.
The Chiswick press in 1844 revived Caslon's founts, printing for Messrs. Longman the Diary of Lady Willoughby.
It is discouraging to note that the improvement of the last fifty years is almost wholly confined to Great Britain.
Italy is contentedly stagnant.
Here, again, if the practice of "leading" were retrenched larger type could be used without enhancing the price of a book.
One very important matter in "setting up" for fine printing is the "spacing," that is, the lateral distance of words from one another.
The position of the page on the paper should be considered if the book is to have a satisfactory look.
Here once more the almost invariable modern practice is in opposition to a natural sense of proportion.
On the whole, a small book should be printed on paper which is as thin as may be without being transparent.
However, the fact must not be blinked that machine-made paper cannot in the nature of things be made of so good a texture as that made by hand.
The ornamentation of printed books is too wide a subject to be dealt with fully here; but one thing must be said on it.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 4: Newgate down to 1818.
The new jail fell as far short of the demands made on it as did the old.
Neild gives some figures which well illustrate this.
On the 14th June, 1800, there were 199 debtors and 289 felons in the prison.
For two more years these high figures were steadily maintained, and in 1803 the total rose to 710.
Previous to that date there had been 700 or 800 frequently, and once, in Mr. Akerman's time, one thousand.
Trustworthy evidence is forthcoming to the effect that these high figures were constantly maintained for many months at a time.
Quote. the apartments set apart for them, being built to accommodate 60 persons, now contain about 120. End quote.
Full details of the arrangements are to be found in Mr. Neild's "State of Prisons in England, Scotland, and Wales," published in 1812.
The jail at that date was divided into eight separate and more or less distinct departments, each of which had its own wards and yard.
These were: 1. The male debtors' side.
The day room was fitted with benches and settles after the manner of the tap in a public-house.
A high wall fifteen feet in height divided the females' court-yard from the men's.
This arrangement was, however, modified after 1811, and the chapel yard was allotted to misdemeanants and prisoners awaiting trial.
The wards in this part were five in number, all in dimensions twenty feet by fifteen, with a sixth ward fifteen feet square.
These wards were all fitted with barrack-beds, but no bedding was supplied.
The middle yard was at first given up to the least heinous offenders. After 1812 it changed functions with the chapel yard.
The state side was the part stolen from the female felons' side.
It was large and comparatively commodious, being maintained on a better footing than any other part of the prison.
The inmates were privileged, either by antecedents or the fortunate possession of sufficient funds to pay the charges of the place.
Its name and its situation were the same as those of the old place of carrying out the terrible sentence inflicted on accused persons who stood mute.
Beyond the press yard were three stories, condemned cells, fifteen in all, with vaulted ceilings nine feet high to the crown of the arch.
In each cell there was a barrack bedstead on the floor without bedding.
The two yards were adjoining, that for the common side much the largest.
Having thus briefly described the plan and appropriation of the prison, I propose to deal now with the general condition of the inmates, and the manner of their life.
Of these the debtors, male and female, formed a large proportion.
The number of processes against debtors annually was extraordinary.
Fifteen thousand of these were issued in Middlesex alone, which at that time was reckoned as only a fifteenth of Great Britain.
The number of arrests actually made was 114,300 for the kingdom, and 7020 for Middlesex.
Barely half of these gave bail bonds on arrests, and the remainder went to prison.
Quite half of the foregoing writs and arrests applied to sums under £30.
An elaborate machinery planned for the protection of the trader, and altogether on his side, had long existed for the recovery of debts.
Alfred the Great established the Court Baron, the Hundred Court, and the County Court, which among other matters entertained pleas for debt.
These courts were open to many and grave objections.
Often a commissioner had to leave the bench because he was himself a party to the suit that was sub judice.
The latter indeed hung like millstones round the neck of the unhappy insolvent wretches who found themselves in limbo.
Costs were the gallons of sack to the pennyworth of debt.
Thus, amongst others, Thomas Blackburn had been committed on October 15th for a debt of 1 shilling 5 pence.
Thomas Dobson, on 22nd August, 1799, for 1 shilling, with costs of 8 shillings, 10 pence.
These surely, I thought," says Mr. Neild, "were bad enough! But it was not so. End quote.
Bird was, however, discharged within three days by a subscription raised among his fellow-prisoners.
The lad in question was found in Coldbath Fields prison, to which he had been sent for a month in default of paying a fine of forty shillings.
He had been in the employ of a corn-chandler at Islington, and went into London with his master's cart and horse.
There was in the City Road a temporary bar, with a collector of tolls who was sometimes on the spot and sometimes not.
The boy declared he saw no one, and accordingly passed through without paying the toll of a penny.
For this he was summoned before a magistrate, and sentenced as already stated.
The lad was proved to be of good character and the son of respectable parents.
Mr. Buxton's friends at once paid the forty shillings, and the boy was released.
The costs in heavier debts always doubled the sum; if the arrest was made in the country it trebled it.
The King's Bench was a national prison, in which were confined all debtors arrested for debt or for contempt of the court of the King's Bench.
The population generally amounted to from five hundred to seven hundred, the accommodation being calculated for two hundred.
No fixed rates or rules governed the hiring out of rooms or parts of a room, and all sorts of imposition was practiced.
Besides these, a number had the privilege of a "run on the key," which allowed a prisoner to go into the rules for the day.
The marshal was supposed to be resident either within the prison or the rules.
He seems to have felt no responsibility as to the welfare or comfort of those in charge, and out of whom he made all his money.
The half or wholly starved prisoners fished for alms or food at the gratings.
When they were sick no more notice was taken of them than of a dog.
A man dying of liver complaint lay on the cold stones without a bed or food to eat.
Dissolute habits prevailed on all sides; drunkenness was universal, gambling perpetual.
Mexico, and was consumed at the rate of a hogshead per week.
It was so used for the date of the abolition of the Star Chamber in the 16th Charles I.
It contained generally from six to seven hundred inmates, while another hundred more or less resided in the rules outside.
The rentals of rooms and fees went to the warden, whose income was £2372.
The state of morals was disgraceful. Any woman obtained admission if sober, and if she got drunk she was not turned out.
There was no distinct place for the female debtors, who lived in the same galleries as the men.
Disturbances were frequent, owing to the riotous conduct of intoxicated women.
Twice a week there was a wine and beer club held at night, which lasted till two or three in the morning.
Matters were rather better at the Marshalsea.
At one time the Marshalsea was the receptacle of pirates, but none were committed to it after 1789.
As the business of the Marshalsea Court declined, the numbers in its prison diminished.
Their conduct too was orderly on the whole.
Drunkenness was not common, chiefly because liquor was not to be had freely, although the tapster paid a rent of two guineas a week for permission to sell it.
A court of the collegians was held every Monday to manage its affairs, at which all prisoners were required to attend.
Yet the public opinion of the whole body seems to have checked dissipation.
The latter's salary, with fees, the rent of the tap and of the chandler's shop, amounted to about £600 a year.
The Giltspur Street Compter received sheriffs' debtors, also felons, vagrants, and night charges.
It was generally crowded, as debtors who would have gone to the Poultry Compter were sent to Giltspur Street when the former was condemned as unfit to receive prisoners.
The demands for fees were excessive in Giltspur Street.
The rooms had no fireplaces, so it mattered little that no coals were allowed.
There were no beds or bedding, no straw even.
Neild found the prisoners in the Borough Compter ragged, starving, and dirty.
This was the reprehensible claim for "garnish," which had already been abolished in all well-conducted prisons, but which still was demanded in Newgate.
Numerous tyrannies were practiced on all who would not and could not pay the garnish.
Besides these fees, legitimate and illegitimate, there were others which must be paid before release.
Share in the weekly allowance of meat might also be denied to debtors who had not paid "garnish," as well as in the weekly grant from the charitable fund.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 5: Newgate down to 1818, part 2.
The squalor and uncleanness of the debtors' side was intensified by constant overcrowding.
Prisoners were committed to it quite without reference to its capacity.
Friends arrived about nine a.m., and went out at nine p.m., when as many as two hundred visitors have been observed leaving the debtors' yards at one time.
No attempt was made to check drunkenness, beyond the penalty of shutting out friends from any ward in which a prisoner exceeded.
Quarreling among the debtors was not unfrequent. Blows were struck, and fights often ensued.
For this and other acts of misconduct there was the discipline of the refractory ward, or "strong room" on the debtors' side.
Bad cases were removed to a cell on the felons' side, and here they were locked in solitary confinement for three days at a time.
This was the pernicious plan of governing by prisoners, or of setting a favored few in authority over the many.
The head of the debtors' prison was a prisoner called the steward, who was chosen by the whole body from six whom the keeper nominated.
This steward was practically supreme.
In the latter duties he was, however, supervised by three auditors, freely chosen by the prisoners among themselves.
The auditors were paid a shilling each for their services each time the poor-box was opened. The steward was also remunerated for his trouble.
Under the steward there were captains of wards, chosen in the same way, and performing analogous duties.
These subordinate chiefs were also rewarded out of the scanty prison rations.
The same system was extended to the criminal side, and cases were on record of the place of wardsman being sold for considerable sums.
So valuable were they deemed, that as much as fifty guineas was offered to the keeper for the post.
Enough has been said, probably, to prove that there was room for improvement in the condition and treatment of debtors in the prisons of the city of London.
Authority was given to raise money on the Orphans' Fund to the extent of £90,000.
Giltspur Street, and the Poultry, or about four hundred and seventy-six in all.
The evils of association for these debtors were perpetuated, although the plan provided for the separation of the various contingents committed to it.
There was no lack of air and light for the new jail, and several exercising yards.
Newgate continued to be a reproach to those responsible for its management.
I pass now to the criminal side of Newgate, which consisted of the six quarters or yards already enumerated and described.
At one time the whole of these different categories were thrown together pell-mell, young and old, the untried with the convicted.
This was the chapel yard, with its five wards, which were calculated to hold seventy prisoners, but often held many more.
No beds were issued, only two rugs per prisoner.
All the misdemeanants, whatever their offense, were lodged in this chapel ward.
Indeed the partial classification attempted seems to have been abandoned within a year or two.
Two of the untried were for murder, and several for house-breaking and highway robbery.
Nor were the misdemeanants and bail prisoners any longer separated from those whose crimes were of a more serious character.
Persons convicted of publishing libels were still immured in the same rooms with transports and felons.
The middle yard, as far as its limits would permit, was appropriated to felons and transports. The wards here were generally very crowded.
Quote, a common-sized man, says the keeper, Mr. Newman, can turn in nineteen inches, end quote.
These twenty-four could just sleep on the barrack bed; when the number was higher, and it often rose to forty, the surplus had to sleep on the floor.
The crowding was in consequence of the delay in removing transports.
Occasionally the transports made themselves so useful in the jail that they were passed over.
Mr. Newman admitted that he had petitioned that certain "trusty men" might be left in the jail.
Constantly associated with these convicted felons were numbers of juveniles, infants of tender years.
Quote, in this dreadful situation, end quote. who had been rescued from the hulks through the kindness and attention of the Secretary of State.
Mr. Buxton, in the work already quoted, instances another grievous case of the horrors of indiscriminate association in Newgate.
It was that of a person, quote, who practiced in the law, and who was connected by marriage with some very respectable families.
They viewed him with some suspicion, as one of whom they knew nothing.
He was in consequence put out of the protection of their internal law, end quote. Their code was a subject of some curiosity.
When any prisoner committed an offense against the community or against an individual, he was tried by a court in the jail.
A jury having been selected and duly sworn, the culprit was then arraigned. Justice, however, was not administered with absolute integrity.
A bribe to the judge was certain to secure acquittal, and the neglect of the formality was as certainly followed by condemnation.
Various punishments were inflicted, the heaviest of which was standing in the pillory.
This was carried out by putting the criminal's head through the legs of a chair, and stretching out his arms and tying them to the legs.
The culprit was then compelled to carry the chair about with him.
But all punishments might readily be commuted into a fine to be spent in gin for judge and jury.
The prisoner mentioned above was continually persecuted by trials of this kind.
The most trifling acts were magnified into offenses.
He was charged with moving something which should not be touched, with leaving a door open, or coughing maliciously to the disturbance of his companions.
The evidence was invariably sufficient to convict, and the judge never hesitated to inflict the heaviest penalties.
His wife visited him in Newgate, and wrote a pitiable account of the state in which she found her husband.
One day he was too ill to come down and meet her.
All who could scrape together the cash seem to have gladly availed themselves of the privilege of entering the master's side.
It was the only way to escape the horrors, the distress, penury, and rags of the common yards.
Idleness was not so universally the rule in this part of the jail.
Artisans and others were at liberty to work at their trades, provided they were not dangerous.
Tailoring and shoemaking was permitted, but it was deemed unsafe to allow a carpenter or blacksmith to have his tools.
All the money earned by prisoners was at their own disposal, and was spent almost habitually in drink, chambering, and wantonness.
The fee for admission to the state side, as fixed by the table of fees, was three guineas, but Mr. Newman declared that he never took more than two.
Ten and sixpence a week more was charged as rent for a single bed; where two or more slept in a bed the rent was seven shillings a week each.
Prisoners who could afford it sometimes paid for four beds, at the rate of twenty-eight shillings, and so secured the luxury of a private room.
A Mr. Lundy, charged with forgery, was thus accommodated on the state side for upwards of five years.
But the keeper protested that no single prisoner could thus monopolize space if the state side was crowded.
The keeper went still further in his efforts to make money.
He continued the ancient practice of letting out a portion of his own house, and by a poetical fiction treated it as an annex of the state side.
These wards were always full to overflowing; sometimes double the number the rooms could accommodate were crowded into them.
There was a master's side for females who could pay the usual fees, but they associated with the rest in the one narrow yard common to all.
There was no separation even for the women under sentence of death, who lived in a common and perpetually crowded ward.
Only when the order of execution came down were those about to suffer placed apart in one of the rooms in the arcade of the middle ward.
I have kept till the last that part of the prison which was usually the last resting-place of so many.
The old press yard has been fully described in a previous chapter.
The name still survived in the new press yard, which was the receptacle of the male condemned prisoners. It was generally crowded, like the rest of the prison.
Hence there was a terrible accumulation of prisoners in the condemned cells.
Once, during the long illness of George III., as many as one hundred were there waiting the "Report," as it was called.
At another time there were fifty, one of whom had been under sentence a couple of years.
This procrastination bred certain callousness.
I saw Cashman a few hours before his execution, smoking and drinking with the utmost unconcern and indifference, end quote.
They were never left quite alone for fear of suicide, and for the same reason they were searched for weapons or poisons.
But they nevertheless frequently managed to secrete the means of making away with themselves, and accomplished their purpose.
This latter was an ordeal which all dreaded, and many avoided by denying their faith.
The condemned occupied an open pew in the center of the chapel, hung with black; in front of them, upon a table, was a black coffin in full view.
The chapel was filled with a curious but callous congregation, who came to stare at the miserable people thus publicly exposed.
Yet it must have been abundantly plain to the reader that the other evils existing were great and glaring. A brief summary of them will best prove this.
The jail was neither suitable nor sufficiently large. It was not even kept weather-tight.
The roof of the female prison, says the grand jury in their presentment in 1813, let in the rain.
The rations of food were notoriously inadequate, and so carelessly distributed, that many were left to starve.
These were fetched away in a large tub on a truck by a turnkey.
Amongst the heap was often the meat that had made turtle soup, which, when heated and stirred together in a saucepan, was said to be very good eating.
Garnish continued to be demanded long after it had disappeared in other and better-regulated prisons.
Ironing was still the rule, not only for the convicted, but for those charged with felonies; only the misdemeanants escaped.
The unchecked admission of crowds of visitors to the felons' as well as the debtors' side was another unmixed evil.
By this means spirits, otherwise unattainable and strictly prohibited, were smuggled into the jail.
Searches were made certainly, but they were too often superficial, or they might be evaded by a trifling bribe.
Owing to the facility of intercourse between inside and outside, many crimes were doubtless hatched in Newgate.
Some of the worst and most extensive burglaries were planned there.
These malpractices were fostered by the absence of all supervision and the generally unbroken idleness.
Insuperable difficulties were still supposed to stand in the way of any general employment of prisoners at their trades.
Many years were to elapse before these objections should be fairly met and universally overcome.
The above-mentioned report was ordered to be printed upon the 9th May.
This committee made its report in September the following year, and an excellent report it is, so far as its recommendations are concerned.
The provision of more baths was also suggested, and the daily sweeping out of the prison.
A laundry should be established, and a matron appointed on the female side, where all the prisoners' washing could be performed.
The committee took upon itself to lay down stringent rules for the discipline of the prison.
All three, governor, chaplain, and surgeon, should keep journals, which should be inspected periodically by the visiting magistrates.
It should be peremptorily forbidden to the keeper or any officer to make a pecuniary profit out of the supplies of food, fuel, or other necessaries.
No prisoner should be allowed to obtain superior accommodation on the payment of any fees. Fees indeed should be generally abolished, garnish also.
It will hardly be denied that these proposals went to the root of the matter.
Had they been accepted in their entirety, little fault could in future have been found with the managers of Newgate.
In common justice to them, it must be admitted that immediate effect was given to all that could be easily carried out.
The state side ceased to exist, and the female prisoners thus regained the space of which their quadrangle had been robbed.
The privileges of the master's side also disappeared; fees were nominally abolished, and garnish was scotched, although not yet killed outright.
A certain number of bedsteads were provided, and there was a slight increase in the ration of bread.
But here the recommendations touched at once upon the delicate subject of expense, and it is clear that the committee hesitated on this score.
It made this too the excuse for begging the most important issue of the whole question.
All the committee could do in this respect was to throw the responsibility on others.
It pointed out that the Government was to blame for the overcrowding, and might diminish it if it chose.
It was very desirable that there should be a more speedy removal of transports from Newgate to the ships.
Again, there was the new Millbank penitentiary now ready for occupation.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 7: The beginnings of prison reform.
It began to be understood that prison reform could only be compassed by continuous and combined effort.
The pleadings, however eloquent, of a single individual were unable to more than partially remedy the widespread and colossal evils of British prisons.
Howard's energy and devotion were rewarded by lively sympathy, but the desire to improve which followed his exposures was but short-lived.
I have shown in a previous chapter what Newgate was at this period, despite a vast expenditure and boasted efforts to introduce reforms.
The neglect of prison reform in those days was not to be visited upon the legislature.
The executive, although harassed by internal commotion and foreign war, was not entirely callous to the crying need for amelioration in jails.
Measures remedial, although at best partial and incomplete, were introduced from time to time.
Various acts were also passed to consolidate and amend previous jail acts.
But the effect of this legislation was rather weakened by the remoteness of the pressure exercised.
Moreover, the laws applied more particularly to county jurisdictions.
Yet the borough jails were destined to survive many years, and to exhibit for a long time to come all the worst features of jail mismanagement.
It was in 1817 that a small band of philanthropists resolved to form themselves into an association for the improvement of prison discipline.
They were hopeless of any general reform by the action of the executive alone.
The association was organized under the most promising auspices.
Mr. Sturges Bourne, Sir James Mackintosh, Sir James Scarlett, and William Wilberforce.
An active committee was appointed, comprising many names already well known, some of them destined to become famous in the annals of philanthropy.
One of the moving spirits was the Honorable H. G. Bennet, M.P., whose vigorous protests against the lamentable condition of Newgate have already been recorded.
Mr. Gurney, Mr. Fry, Messrs. Forster, and Mr. T. F. Buxton, the coadjutor of Wilberforce in the great anti-slavery struggle.
Mr. Buxton had already been associated with Mrs. Fry in the Newgate visitation, and his attention had thus been drawn to the neglected state of English prisons.
Mr. Buxton's small work on prison discipline gave a new aspect to the question he had so much at heart.
For the first time the doctrine was enunciated that prisoners had rights of their own.
The untried, and in the eyes of the law still innocent, could claim pure air, wholesome and sufficient food, and opportunities for exercise.
They had a right, Mr. Buxton affirmed, to be employed in their own crafts, provided it could be safely followed in prison.
No judge ever condemned a man to be half-perished with cold by day, or half-suffocated with heat by night.
These somewhat novel but undoubtedly indisputable propositions were backed up, not by sound arguments only, but by the letter of the law.
As Mr. Buxton pointed out, many old acts of parliament designed to protect the prisoner were still in full force.
Some might be in abeyance, but they had never been repealed, and some were quite freshly imported upon the Statute Book.
Ventilators, hand and others, were to be supplied.
An infirmary, consisting of two distinct rooms, one for males and one for females, should be provided for the separate accommodation of the sick.
Yet another act passed in 1791, if properly observed, should have insured proper attention to them.
They were to report in writing to quarter sessions as to the state of the jail, and as to all abuses which they might observe therein.
It was made incumbent upon the justices to provide distinct places of confinement for five classes of prisoners, viz.
It was further ordered that male prisoners should be kept perfectly distinct from the females.
King's evidences were also to be lodged apart.
Infirmaries separating the sexes were also to be provided, a chapel too, and warm and cold baths.
The want of room was still a crying evil.
All prisoners passed their time in absolute idleness, or killed it by gambling and loose conversation.
One poor wretch, who had slept next the wall, said he had been literally unable to move for the pressure.
The irons, which nearly every one wore, were remarkably heavy; those double ironed could not take off their small clothes.
No prison dress was allowed, and half the inmates were without shirts or shoes or stockings.
The diet was limited to dry bread, which was of the best certainly, and a pound and a half in weight.
Matters were on much the same footing at St. Albans.
In 1818 the old jail was so densely packed that it was nearly impossible to pass through the yards for the throng.
One hundred and fifty were lodged in a prison just capable of holding fifty-two.
All charged with felony were in heavy irons, without distinction of age.
All were in ill health; almost all were in rags; almost all were filthy in the extreme.
At the bottom was a circular space, through which ran a narrow passage, and the sides of which were fitted with barrack bedsteads.
The floor was on the level of the river, and very damp.
On the dirty bedstead lay a wretched being in the throes of severe illness.
Confinement for twelve months in the Bristol jail was counted a punishment equivalent to seven years' transportation.
In this prison there was no female infirmary.
Sick women and their children remained in the ordinary wards, and propagated disease.
No prison dress was allowed; no reception-room was provided, no soap, towels, or baths.
The bedclothes consisted only of a single "very slight" rug.
As for the debtors, they had no allowance whatever, and were often in imminent danger of starvation.
With all this, the inmates were crowded together at night to such a degree as to excite surprise that they should escape suffocation.
It is consoling to know that there were a few brilliant exceptions to this cruel, callous neglect.
The great principles of classification, cleanliness, and employment were closely observed.
The prison stood on a dry, airy situation outside the town.
Prisoners on reception were treated as they are now-a-days -- bathed, dressed in prison clothes, and inspected by the surgeon.
No irons were worn except as a punishment.
Personal cleanliness was insisted upon, and all parts of the prison were kept scrupulously clean.
There was an infirmary, properly found and duly looked after.
No idleness was permitted among the inmates. Trades were taught, or prisoners were allowed to follow their own if suitable.
There was, besides, a mill for grinding corn, somewhat similar to a turn-spit, which prisoners turned by walking in rows.
This made exertion compulsory, and imposed hard labor as a proper punishment.
Another jail, that of Ilchester, was also worthy of all commendation. It exhibited all the good points of that at Bury.
At Ilchester the rule of employment had been carried further.
A system not adopted generally till nearly half a century later had already prevailed at Ilchester.
The new jail had been in a great measure constructed by the prisoners themselves.
Masons, bricklayers, carpenters, painters had been employed upon the buildings, and the work was pronounced excellent by competent judges.
Industrial labor had also been introduced with satisfactory results.
There were work-rooms for wool-washing, dyeing, carding, and spinning.
The looms were constantly busy. Tailors were always at work, and every article of clothing and bedding was made up within the walls.
There was a prison laundry too, where all the prisoners' linen was regularly washed.
The moral welfare of the inmates was as closely looked after as the physical.
There was an attentive chaplain, a schoolmaster, and regular religious and other instruction.
Compared with those highly meritorious institutions Newgate still showed but badly.
The most noticeable of the improvements introduced was a better regulation of dietaries within the prison.
The food was properly prepared in the prison kitchen.
Meat was no longer issued raw, to be imperfectly cooked before a ward fire and bolted gluttonously, the whole two pounds at one sitting.
Mr. Brown confidently asserted that no jail in England now fed its inmates so well as did Newgate.
It was also claimed for the more ample and more orderly distribution of victuals, that the general health of the prisoners had greatly improved.
Mr. Brown also, much to his own credit, brought about the abandonment of the practice of ironing all prisoners as a matter of course.
In 1818 prisoners awaiting trial in Newgate, were at length relieved from this illegal infliction.
Convicts were not even compelled to wear irons, providing they behaved well.
It was found that shackles might be safely dispensed with, even in the case of the most desperate characters.
This was effected by stopping the nearly indiscriminate admission of visitors, which had hitherto prevailed all over the jail.
Ironing it will be remembered, was a distinguishing badge, so that when the jail was cleared the free might be readily known from the captive, and escapes prevented.
Under the new rule visitors were not allowed to pass into the interior of the prison, but were detained between the grating.
This change led to some discontent, until it was found that the much greater boon of relief from irons accompanied it, and the reform was quietly accepted.
Indeed the best consequences followed from the removal of irons. The prisoners were much better disposed; there were no riots, and fewer disturbances.
But nothing short of radical reform and complete reconstruction could touch the deep-seated evils of association, overcrowding, and idleness.
The first still produced deplorable results -- results to be observable for many years to come.
Mr. Buxton mentions the case of a boy whose apparent innocence and artlessness had attracted his attention.
He had been committed for an offense for which he was acquitted.
He left Newgate utterly corrupted, and after lapsing into crime, soon returned with a very different character.
Other cases of moral deterioration have already been recorded.
Some attempt was made to reduce the overcrowding, on the recommendation of the House of Commons Committee of 1818, but this applied only a partial remedy.
The bulk of the prisoners were still left in idleness.
A few fortunate criminals, many of them kept back from transportation on purpose, who were skilled in trades, were employed at them.
Painters, plasterers, and carpenters were allowed to follow their handicrafts, with the reward of sixpence per diem and a double allowance of food.
But this boon of toil was denied to all but a very limited number.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 8: The beginnings of prison reform.
Newgate prisoners were the victims to another most objectionable practice which obtained all over London.
One smug alderman, a member of the House of Commons, sneered at the ultra philanthropy of the champions of prison improvement.
While fully admitting the good intentions of the Society, he condemned their ultra humanitarianism as misplaced.
He took exception to various of the proposals of the Society. He thought they leant too much to a system of indulgence and education in jails.
He objected to the instruction of prisoners in reading and writing.
He was altogether against too liberal a diet; he disapproved of industrial occupations in jails, as not calculated to render prisons terrible.
The objects it had in view were set forth in one of its earliest meetings.
Nor did it confine itself to mere verbal recommendations.
At the time of its greatest prosperity, its annual income from donations and subscriptions was about one thousand six hundred pounds.
Another point to which the Society devoted infinite pains was the preparation of plans for the guidance of architects in the construction of prisons.
With some important modifications this principle of radiation is still the rule.
Experience has since shown that in some respects these plans are defective, especially in the placing of the governor's residence in the center of the prison.
Absence of embellishment is in perfect unison with the character of the establishment.
After a few years of active exertion the Society was rewarded by fresh legislation.
Accordingly due provision was made for the enforcement of hard labor on all prisoners sentenced to it, and for the employment of all others.
Female prisoners were in all cases to be under the charge of female officers.
Every prison containing female prisoners was to have a matron who was to reside constantly in the prison.
The promulgation of these two Jail Acts strengthened the hands of the Prison Discipline Society enormously.
The progress of improvement was certainly extremely slow.
It was long before the many jurisdictions imitated the few.
Jails, of which the old prison at Reading was a specimen, were still left intact.
In another jail not far off male and female felons still occupied the same room -- underground, and reached by a ladder of ten steps.
Numbers of the jails were still unprovided with chaplains, and the prisoners never heard Divine service.
In many others there were no infirmaries, no places set apart for the confinement of prisoners afflicted with dangerous and infectious disorders.
No attempt was made to maintain discipline.
Half the jails had no code of rules properly prepared and sanctioned by the judges, according to law.
Religious worship became more generally the rule; chaplains were appointed, and chapels provided for them; surgeons and hospitals also.
Workshops were built at many prisons, various kinds of manufactures and trades were set on foot, including weaving, matting, shoe-making, and tailoring.
There were tread-wheels at most of the prisons, and regular employment thereon or at some other kind of hard labor.
In many places too where the prisoners earned money by their work, they were granted a portion of it for their own use after proper deduction for maintenance.
Only a few glaring evils still demanded a remedy.
The want of sleeping cells long continued a crying need.
The "scenes of tumult and obscenity" in these night rooms are said to have been beyond description; a prisoner in one nocturnal riot lost an eye.
Yet to Clerkenwell were now committed the juveniles, and all who were inexperienced in crime.
At the time of which I am writing there was great diversity of practice as regards the hours of labor.
In some prisons the prisoners worked seven hours a day, in others ten and ten and a half.
The nature of the employment varied greatly in severity, especially the tread-wheel labor.
Earnings were very differently appropriated. Here the prisoners were given the whole amount, there a half or a third.
Sometimes this money might be expended in the purchase of extra articles of food.
The rations varied considerably everywhere.
Here and there food was not issued in kind, but a money allowance which the prisoner might expend himself.
One great impediment to wide amelioration was that a vast number of small jails lay out of reach of the law.
When the new acts were introduced, numerous prisons under local jurisdiction were exempted from the operation of the law.
They were so radically bad that reform seemed hopeless, and it was thought wiser not to bring them under provisions which clearly could not be enforced.
Nearly every one of these jurisdictions had its own prison, and there were one hundred and sixty such jails in all.
Many of them consisted of one or two rooms at most.
It was in these jails, withdrawn from the pressure of authority, that the new rules were invariably ignored.
As time passed, however, these magistrates made no effort at reform.
They neither built new jails nor contracted with the counties, as had been expected, for the transfer of their prisoners.
The Society proceeded to support this indictment by facts. It is much the old story.
The prisoners were lodged in rooms whence they could converse with passengers in the streets, and freely obtain spirits and other prohibited articles.
All descriptions of offenders congregated together in the felons' wards.
The keeper and his officers resided at a distance from the jail, and left its inmates to their own devices.
One borough prison consisted of nothing more than a couple of cells, about ten yards square, and absolutely nothing more.
In another borough, with a population of ten thousand, the prison was of the same dimensions.
One cell was a dungeon, and the other an "improper and unhealthy abode for any human being," with a watercourse running through it.
An examination of this report shows how even the most insignificant township had its jail.
Clun, in Shropshire, had a lock-up under the town hall.
At Eye, in Suffolk, the jail was part of the poor-house; so it was at Richmond, in Yorkshire, where the master of the workhouse was also keeper of the jail.
At Godmanchester there was no jail, but a cage to secure prisoners till they could be taken before a magistrate.
Newgate through all these years continued a bye-word with the Society.
Some reforms had certainly been introduced, such as the abolition of irons, already referred to, and the establishment of male and female infirmaries.
The regular daily visitation of the chaplain was also insisted upon.
But it was pointed out in 1823 that defective construction must always bar the way to any radical improvement in Newgate.
Without enlargement no material change in discipline or interior economy could possibly be introduced.
It was enacted that the court of aldermen should make rules for the government of the prison, and that these should be posted publicly within the walls.
As yet no rules or regulations had been printed or prepared.
These justices were to inspect every part of the prison, and examine into the state and condition of prisoners.
The city justices had not fulfilled this obligation.
Idleness was still the general rule for all prisoners in Newgate, in defiance of the law.
There was no instruction of adult prisoners, in accordance with the law. The sleeping accommodation was still altogether contrary to the latest ideas.
The visits of friends was once more unreservedly allowed, and these incomers freely brought in extra provisions and beer.
Last, and worst of all, the arrangements for keeping the condemned prisoners between sentence and execution were more than unsatisfactory.
I shall have more to say on this subject, and upon the state of Newgate generally, in the following chapter.
The Prison Society did not relax its efforts as time passed, but its leading members had other and more pressing claims upon their energies.
In the year immediately preceding this, Parliament was too busy with the great question of its own reform to spare much time for domestic legislation.
From the moment of a person's committal he was certain to be plunged deeper and deeper in guilt.
The prisoners were crowded together in the jail, contrary to the requirements of the 4 George IV.
Again in 1835 prisons and their inmates became once more the care of the senate, and the subject was taken up this time by the House of Lords.
As a means of increasing the severity of imprisonment, letters and visits from outside should not be permitted during the first six months of an imprisonment.
In these the commissioners found "additional proof of the evils of continuing the present constitution of the local tribunals.
Instances rarely occur in which the borough jails admit of any proper classification of the prisoners.
In some large towns, as at Berwick on Tweed, Southampton, and Southwark, they (the prisons) are in a very discreditable condition.
In many of the smaller boroughs they are totally unfit for the confinement of human beings.
In these places the prisoners are often without a proper supply of air and light; frequently the jails are mere dungeons under the town hall.
The Lords' Committee on Jails were of the same opinion, and considered the prisons under corporate or peculiar jurisdiction in a very unsatisfactory condition.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 9: The first report of the inspector of prisons.
In the preceding chapter I have been tempted by the importance of the general question to give it prominence and precedence over the particular branch of which I am treating.
Newgate has remained rather in the background while the whole of the jails as a body were under discussion.
Sir Frederick Roe was of the same opinion as regards the appointment, but he would give the inspectors the power of acting as well as reporting.
One was Mr. William Crawford, the other the Rev. Whitworth Russell.
The first named had long been an active philanthropist, devoting himself more particularly to the reformation of juvenile criminals.
William Crawford had been one of the promoters and managers of the Philanthropic Society's farm school.
Later on he had devoted himself to the personal investigation of the prisons of the United States.
Several European states had dispatched emissaries to examine and report upon them.
France had sent Misseurs Beaumont and De Tocqueville, who subsequently published several interesting works on the subject.
England was represented by Mr. Crawford, and the result of his inquiry was given to the public as an appendix to the House of Commons' Report on Secondary Punishments.
It is an able and exhaustive state paper, testifying to the keenness of the writer's perception, and his unremitting labor in pursuing his researches.
Mr. Crawford was thoroughly versed in the still imperfectly understood science of prison management, and fully qualified for his new duties.
Messrs. Crawford and Russell proceeded to carry out their new functions with commendable energy, and without a moment's loss of time.
The ink was barely dry upon their letters of appointment before they appeared at Newgate, and commenced a searching investigation.
They visited the wards after locking-up time, and saw with their own eyes what went on.
The fact was that the years as they passed, nearly twenty in all, had worked but little permanent improvement in this detestable prison.
Changes introduced under pressure had been only skin deep.
Relapse was rapid and inevitable, so that the latter state of the prison was worse than the first.
All these evils were set forth at length in the inspectors' first report.
There was no longer the faintest possible excuse for overcrowding. The numbers now committed to Newgate had sensibly diminished.
The prison had become more or less a place of detention only, harboring mainly those awaiting trial.
Some rooms remained quite empty and unoccupied, while others were full to overflowing.
In the middle yard it was still worse.
No doubt the governor for the time being, Mr. Cope, was in a great measure to blame for all this, and for the want of proper classification.
He was unable to give any reason whatever for not utilizing the whole of the wards.
He saw certain rooms fill up, and yet took no steps to open others that were locked up and empty.
He blamed the construction of Newgate for the neglect of classification, and was yet compelled to confess that he had made no attempt whatever to carry it out.
The fact was, he did not keep the classification of prisoners on first arrival in his own hands, nor even in that of his officers.
A new prisoner's fate, as to location, rested really with a powerful fellow-prisoner.
It must be admitted that so far but little effort had been made to counteract the evils of indiscriminate association.
So closely did they lie together, that the inspectors at their night visits found it difficult in stepping across the room to avoid treading on them.
Sometimes two mats were allotted to three sleepers. Sometimes four slept under the same bedding, and left their mats unoccupied.
The rugs used were never washed; an order existed that the bedding should be taken into the yards to be aired, but it was not very punctually obeyed.
The only convenience for personal ablutions were the pumps in the yards, and the far-off baths in the condemned or press-yard.
Water might not be taken into the ward for washing purposes.
There was some provision of clothing, but it was quite insufficient, and nothing at all was given if prisoners had enough of their own to cover their nakedness.
This, too, was in the depth of the winter, and during a most inclement season.
He had power where his exactions were resisted of making the ward most uncomfortable for the defaulter.
The authority of these wardsmen so improperly exalted, and so entirely unchecked, degenerated into a baneful despotism.
They bought their offices from one another, and were thus considered to have a vested interest in them.
Their original capital had been a few shillings, and for this they purchased the right to tax their fellows to the extent of pounds per week.
He made collections when it suited him for ward purposes, to be spent as he chose, in candles and so forth.
The brief-drawing gatesman and wardsman at the time of the inspectors' first visit must have been a particularly powerful personage.
All the wardsmen alike were more or less irresponsible.
The turnkeys complained bitterly that these old prisoners had more power than they themselves.
These wardsmen, besides thus ruling the roast, had numerous special privileges, if such they can be called.
They had a standing bedstead to sleep on, and a good flock mattress; double allowance of provisions, filched from the common stock.
Nobody interfered with them or regulated their conduct. They might get drunk when so disposed, and did so frequently, alone or in company.
The female wards-women were also given to intemperance.
The matron deposed to having seen the gates-woman "exceedingly drunk," and having been insulted by her.
There was no penalty attached to drunkenness.
A wardsman did not necessarily lose his situation for it. Nor was drink the only creature comfort he might enjoy.
Probably authority would not have been so recklessly usurped by the wardsmen had not the proper officials too readily surrendered it.
Many of them were otherwise and improperly occupied for hours every day in menial services for the governor, cleaning his windows or grooming his horse.
One turnkey had been so employed several hours daily for nearly eleven years.
It was not strange that subordinates should neglect their duty when superiors set the example.
Nothing was more prominently brought out by the inspectors than the inefficiency of the governor at that time, Mr. Cope.
He may have erred in some points through ignorance, but in others he was clearly guilty of culpable neglect.
We have seen that he took no pains to classify and separate prisoners on reception.
This was only one of many grave omissions on his part. He did not feel it incumbent on himself to visit his prison often or see his prisoners.
The act prescribed that he should do both every twenty-four hours, but days passed without his entering the wards.
Again, a turnkey deposed that his chief did not enter the wards more than once a fortnight.
He kept no daily journal of occurrences, and nothing, however important, was recorded at the time.
The aldermen never called upon him to report, and left him nearly unsupervised and uncontrolled.
It was the same old story -- evil constantly in the ascendant, the least criminal at the mercy of the most depraved.
It was, moreover, in his opinion undoubtedly the greatest nursery of crime in London.
No provision whatever was made for the employment of prisoners, no materials were purchased, no trade instructors appointed.
There was no school for adults; only the boys were taught anything, and their instructor, with his assistant, were convicted prisoners.
Idle hands and unoccupied brains found in mischief the only means of whiling away the long hours of incarceration.
Gaming of all kinds, although forbidden by the Jail Acts, was habitually practiced.
This was admitted in evidence by the turnkeys, and was proved by the appearance of the prison tables, which bore the marks of gaming-boards deeply cut into them.
Drink, in more or less unlimited quantities, was still to be had.
The beer-man brought in as much as he pleased; he sold it without the controlling presence of an officer.
Not only did prisoners come again and again for a "pint," but large quantities were carried off to the wards to be drunk later in the day.
There were more varied, and at times, especially when beer had circulated freely, more uproarious diversions.
Feasting alternated with fighting.
There was much swearing and bad language, the very worst that could be used, from the first thing in the morning to the last thing at night.
Often the victim, goaded to madness, attacked his tormentors; a fight was then certain to follow.
These fights sometimes took place in the daytime, when a ring was regularly formed, and two or three stood by the door to watch for the officer's approach.
More often they occurred at night, and were continued to the bitter end.
The prisoners in this way administered serious punishment on one another. Black eyes and broken noses were always to be seen.
More cruel injuries were common enough, which did not result from honest hand-to-hand fights.
The surgeon's journal produced to the inspectors contained numerous entries of terrible wounds inflicted in a cowardly way.
During the tumult a prisoner, who was one of the worst of the rioters, was bruised about the head and body.
Watkins' knee-joint is very severely injured.
A prisoner Baxter is in the infirmary in consequence of a severe injury to his wrist-joint.
Watkins' case, referred to above, is made the subject of another and a special report from the surgeon.
Violent inflammation and extensive suppuration ensued, and for a considerable time amputation seemed inevitable.
After severe suffering prolonged for many months, the inflammation was subdued, but the cartilage of the knee-joint was destroyed, and he was crippled for life.
On another occasion a young man, who was being violently teased, seized a knife and stabbed his tormentor in the back.
The prisoner who used the knife was secured, but it was the wardsman, and not the officers, to whom the report was made, and no official inquiry or punishment followed.
Matters were at times still worse, and the rioting went on to such dangerous lengths as to endanger the safety of the building.
On one occasion a disturbance was raised which was not quelled until windows had been broken and forms and tables burnt.
But the inspectors found in the ward cupboards mince-pies and other pasties, cold joints, hams, and so forth.
Many other articles were introduced by visitors, including money, tobacco, pipes, and snuff.
The nearly indiscriminate admission of visitors, although restricted to certain days, continued to be an unmixed evil.
The untried might see their friends three times a week, the convicted only once.
Women saw men if they merely pretended to be wives; even boys were visited by their sweethearts.
Decency was, however, insured by a line of demarcation, and visitors were kept upon each side of a separated double iron railing.
On this female side, where the Ladies' Association still reigned supreme, more system and a greater semblance of decorum was maintained.
But there were evils akin to those on the male side, prominent amongst which was the undue influence accorded to prisoners.
A female prisoner kept the registers.
Wards-women were allowed much the same authority, with the same temptations to excess, and intoxication was not unknown among them and others.
There was the same crowding in the sleeping arrangements as on the male side; the same scarcity of bedding.
Thus, when the inspectors visited there were twenty-three strangers, and only twenty-eight prisoners.
The presence of so many strangers, many of them gentlemen, distracted the prisoners' attention, and could not be productive of much good.
The separation of the sexes was not indeed rigidly carried out in Newgate as yet.
In the bail-dock, where most improper general association was permitted, the female prisoners were often altogether in the charge of male turnkeys.
This woman was really his servant, employed to help in cleaning, and taken on whenever there was extra work to be done.
The governor had a great dislike, he said, to seeing strangers in his house.
The house at this time was full of men and visitors; waiters came in from the taverns with meals.
Some of the prisoners had their valets, and all these were constantly in and out of the kitchen where this female prisoner was employed.
There was reveling and roistering, as usual, with "high life below-stairs.
The governor sent down wine on festive occasions, of which no doubt the prisoner housemaid had her share.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 10: The first report of the inspector of prisons.
The inspectors paid tribute to the excellence of the motives of these philanthropic ladies, and recognized the good they did.
After locking-up time, which varied, as on the male side, according to the daylight, the scenes were often riotous and disgraceful.
All privacy was impossible under the circumstances.
At times the numbers congregated together were very great; as many as fifty and sixty, even more, were crowded indiscriminately into the press-yard.
In the midst of the noisy and blasphemous talk no one could pursue his meditations; any who tried to pray became the sport and ridicule of his brutal fellows.
Benjamin Vines and Daniel Ward put in irons for two days for breaking the windows of the day room in the condemned cells.
There were disputes and quarrels constantly among these doomed men; it was a word and blow, an argument clenched always with a fight.
Turnkeys occasionally visited the press-yard, but its occupants were under little or no control.
In his evidence before the inspectors he declared that "for years he gave his whole time to his duties, from an early hour in the morning till late in the afternoon.
He left off because he was so much interfered with and laughed at, and from seeing that no success attended his efforts, owing to the evils arising from association.
Latterly his ministrations to the condemned had been restricted to a visit on Sunday afternoons, and occasionally about once a fortnight on a week-day.
The lax discipline maintained in Newgate was still further deteriorated by the presence of two other classes of prisoners who ought never to have been inmates of such a jail.
One of these were the criminal lunatics, who were at this time and for long previous continuously imprisoned there.
It was manifestly wrong that such persons, "visited by the most awful of calamities," should be detained in a common prison.
Not only did their presence tend greatly to interfere with the discipline of the prison, but their condition was deplorable in the extreme.
Prisoners indeed were known to boast that they had saved their necks by feigning insanity.
Pilgrim, Bond, and Clamp, had refused to give evidence before the House of Commons' Committee; a Speaker's warrant was issued for their arrest when they absconded.
Pilgrim and Dasent were caught and given into the custody of the sergeant-at-arms, and the rest were either arrested or they surrendered.
A resolution at once passed the House without division to commit the whole to Newgate, where they remained for various terms.
Dasent and Pilgrim were released in ten days, on making due submission.
O'Mally sent in a medical certificate, declaring that the imprisonment was endangering his life, and after some question he was also released.
A prisoner, one of the wardsmen, waited on those in the infirmary; the occupants of the governor's house had their own servants, or the governor's.
There were no restraints, cards and backgammon were played, and the time passed in feasting and revelry.
The infirmary at this particular period epitomized the condition of the jail at large.
It was diverted from its proper uses, and, as the "place of the greatest comfort," was allotted to persons who should not have been sent to Newgate at all.
All the evils of indiscriminate association were strongly accentuated by the crowd collected within its narrow limits.
Enough has probably been extracted from this most damnatory report to give a complete picture of the disgraceful state in which Newgate still remained in 1835.
The inspectors, however, honestly admitted that although the site of the prison was convenient, its construction was as bad as bad could be.
Valuable space was cumbered with many long and winding passages, numerous staircases, and unnecessarily thick and cumbrous inner walls.
The wards were in some cases spacious, but they were entirely unsuited for separation or the inspection of prisoners.
The yards were narrow and confined, mainly because the ground plan was radically vicious. These were evils inseparable from the place.
But there were others remediable under a better system of management.
Again, the discipline commonly deemed inseparable from every place of durance was entirely wanting.
The whole system, or more correctly the want of system, was baneful and pernicious to the last degree.
The publication of this report raised a storm in the city, and the corporation was roused to make an immediate protest.
The corporation evidently had the worst of it, and began to feel the necessity for undertaking the great work of reform.
The infirmary was enlarged, the admission of visitors limited, and the passing of articles prevented by a wire screen.
But the one great and most crying evil remained unremedied.
Abuses and irregularities, which had been partially remedied by the reform introduced in 1837, were once more in the ascendant.
Again the following year the inspectors repeat their charge.
For nearly twenty-two hours out of the twenty-four the prisoners are locked up, during which time no officer is stationed in the ward with them.
Newgate is only less extensively injurious than formerly because it is less crowded.
The reports as the years flow on reiterate the same complaints.
Much bitterness of feeling is evidently engendered, and the corporation grows more and more angry with the inspectors.
The prison officials appear to be on the side of the inspectors, to the great dissatisfaction of the corporation, who claimed the full allegiance and support of its servants.
The inspectors were not to be deterred, however, by any opposition from the earnest discharge of their functions, and continued to report against Newgate.
Sometimes the stench in hot weather is said to be very bad.
Many rats also come through these so-called ventilators, as they open close to the ground at the back of the prison.
No complete and permanent improvement was indeed possible while Newgate remained unchanged.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 11: Executions, part one.
The reasons for this change were fully set forth in a previous chapter.
Again, as late as 1809 and 1812, Execution Dock, on the banks of the Thames, was still retained.
They were taken in a cart to the place of execution, amidst a vast concourse of people.
Some indications of pity were offered for the fate of Tilling; Palm, execration alone.
But the Old Bailey gradually, and in spite of all objections urged, monopolized the dread business of execution.
After hanging the usual time they were taken down, and the machine cleared away in half-an-hour.
By practice the art is much improved, and there is no part of the world in which villains are hanged in so neat a manner, and with so little ceremony.
A full description of this new gallows, which was erected in front of the debtors' door, is to be found in contemporary records.
Round the north, west, and south sides are erected galleries for the reception of officers, attendants, etc.
From this bar hang several iron loops, in which the halters are tied.
When the criminals are tied up and prepared for their fate, this floor suddenly falls down, upon withdrawing the supporters inwards.
They are both drawn at once by a windlass, and the unhappy culprits remain suspended.
The machinery in use in Dublin is much the same as that employed at many jails now-a-days.
But the fall apart and inwards of two leaves is considered superior.
The latter is the method still followed at Newgate.
The sentences inflicted in front of Newgate were not limited to hanging.
She is described as a well-made little woman, something more than thirty years of age, of a pale complexion and not disagreeable features.
She walked from the debtors' door to a stake fixed in the ground about half-way between the scaffold and Newgate Street.
A chain fastened by nails to the stake was then put round her body by the executioner with his assistants.
Two cart-loads of faggots were piled about her, and after she had hung for half-an-hour the fire was kindled.
The flames presently burned the halter, the body fell a few inches, and hung then by the iron chain.
The fire had not quite burnt out at twelve, in nearly four hours, that is to say.
A great concourse of people attended on this melancholy occasion.
The change from Tyburn to the Old Bailey had worked no improvement as regards the gathering together of the crowd or its demeanor.
It was still the custom to offer warm encouragement or bitter disapproval, according to the character and antecedents of the sufferer.
At the execution of Governor Wall, in 1802, the furious hatred of the mob was plainly apparent in their appalling cries.
It was said that so large a crowd had never collected since the execution of Mrs. Brownrigg, nor had the public indignation risen so high.
Pieman and ballad-monger did their usual roaring trade amidst the dense throng.
No sooner was the "job" finished than half-a-dozen competitors appeared, each offering the identical rope for sale at a shilling an inch.
Here's the identical rope at sixpence an inch.
Mr. Smith's account of the condemned convict, whose cell he was permitted to enter, may be inserted here.
As we crossed the press yard a cock crew, and the solitary clanking of a restless chain was dreadfully horrible.
The prisoners had not risen.
They entered a "stone cold room," and were presently joined by the prisoner.
His hands were clasped, and he was truly penitent.
He then made some observations to the attendant about the fire, and turning to the doctor, questioned him.
The poor soul then joined the doctor in prayer, and never did I witness more contrition at any condemned sermon than he then evinced.
The sheriff arrived, attended by his officers, to receive the prisoner from the keeper.
A new hat was partly flattened on his head, for, owing to its being too small in the crown, it stood many inches too high behind.
Over the handkerchief around his brows he placed a white cap, the new hat being on top of all.
He was dressed in a mixed-colored loose coat with a black collar, swandown waistcoat, blue pantaloons, and white silk stockings.
These evidently deprived him of the small portion of fortitude he had summoned up.
They were accordingly apprehended and brought to trial, the informer, Hanfield by name, being accepted as king's evidence.
Conviction followed mainly on his testimony; but the two men, especially Holloway, stoutly maintained their innocence to the last.
Very great excitement prevailed in the town throughout the trial, and this greatly increased when the verdict was known.
An enormous crowd assembled to witness the execution, amounting, it was said, to the hitherto unparalleled number of 40,000.
By eight o'clock not an inch of ground in front of the platform was unoccupied.
The pressure soon became so frightful that many would have willingly escaped from the crowd; but their attempts only increased the general confusion.
Cries of Murder! murder! were now raised, and added greatly to the horrors of the scene.
Panic became general. More women, children, and many men were borne down, to perish beneath the feet of the rest.
The most affecting and distressing scene was at Green Arbor Lane, just opposite the debtors' door of the prison.
Here a couple of piemen had been selling their wares; the basket of one of them, which was raised upon a four-legged stool, was upset.
The pieman stooped down to pick up his scattered stock, and some of the mob, not seeing what had happened, stumbled over him.
No one who fell ever rose again.
Among the rest was a woman with an infant at the breast.
In another part seven persons met their death by suffocation.
In this convulsive struggle for bare existence people fought fiercely with one another, and the weakest, of course the women, went under.
One cart-load of spectators having broken down, some of its occupants fell off the vehicle, and were instantly trampled to death.
The concourse was very great, notwithstanding these warnings.
It was still greater at Fauntleroy's execution in 1824, when no less than 100,000 persons assembled, it was said.
Every window and roof which could command a view of the horrible performance was occupied.
At Courvoisier's execution in 1840 it was the same, or worse.
Some persons were kept for more than five hours standing against the barriers, and many nearly fainted from exhaustion.
Every window had its party of occupants; the adjoining roofs were equally crowded.
Those who had hired apartments spent the night in them, keeping up their courage with liquids and cigars.
Numbers of ladies were present, although the public feeling was much against their attendance.
One well-dressed woman fell out of a first-floor window on to the shoulders of the crowd below, but neither she nor any one else was greatly hurt.
Some years later an eye-witness published a graphic account of one of these scenes.
Gin-shops and coffee-houses were the first to open doors, and touts began to bid for tenants for the various rooms upstairs.
Cries of "Comfortable room!" "Excellent situation!" "Beautiful prospect!" "Splendid view!" resounded on every side.
They were mainly members of the criminal classes.
The loud shout of the multitude once more subsided, or only fell upon the abstracted ear like the dreamy murmur of an ocean shell.
Never once from that pale face passed away its benign and patient expression.
Another fight followed the score which had already taken place; this time two women were the combatants.
Another deep roar, louder than any which had preceded it, broke from the multitude.
Then came the cry of 'Hats off!' and 'Down in front!' as at a theatre.
In thus describing the saturnalia before the gallows I have been drawn on somewhat beyond the period with which I am at present dealing.
One of the worst evils was the terrible and long-protracted uncertainty as to the result.
Forty-eight hours was the limit of time allowed to the unhappy man to make his peace, and during that time he was still kept on a bare allowance of bread and water.
This was more particularly the practice in London.
Judges on assize were satisfied with simply recording a sentence of death against offenders whom they did not think deserved the extreme penalty.
At the Old Bailey almost every one capitally convicted by a jury was sentenced to be hanged.
Neither in town or country were cases entirely taken on their own merits.
In this latter it might fairly be said that a man was put to death less for his own sins than for the crimes of others.
The absurdity of the system, its irregularity and cruelty, were fully touched upon by the inspectors of prisons in their first report.
The consequences were plainly proved to the inspectors.
Of this I have treated at length in the last chapter.
When the council had decided, the news was conveyed to Newgate by the Recorder, who made his "report," as it was called.
Sometimes the report was delayed.
On one occasion, Mr. Wakefield tells us, the Recorder, who had attended the council at Windsor, did not deliver the report till the following day.
I have heard the protracted agony of both classes described by those who witnessed it in terms so strong, that I am unwilling to repeat them.
The Recorder's report generally reached Newgate late at night.
The whole of the convicts were assembled together in one ward, and made to kneel down.
The form of imparting the intelligence was generally the same.
The fatal news was not always received in the same way.
The men who were doomed often fell down in convulsions upon the floor.
Sometimes any who had had a narrow escape fainted, but the bulk of those respited looked on with unfeeling indifference.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 12: Executions, part two.
It is satisfactory to be able to record that some consideration was shown the capital convict actually awaiting execution.
Before sentence a prisoner has only to observe the regulations of the jail in order to remain neglected and unnoticed.
I will quote an extract from the reverend gentleman's own journal.
He seems to have improved the occasion when preaching the condemned sermon before Fauntleroy, by pointing a moral from that unhappy man's own case.
One of the aldermen, moreover, informed me that the whole court of aldermen were unanimous in their opinion on this subject.
Probably the reader will side with the aldermen against the ordinary.
The extract is from Mr. E. Gibbon Wakefield's brochure, the date 1828, just three years after Fauntleroy's death.
In the center of the chapel was the condemned pew, a large dock-like erection painted black.
The occupants of this terrible black pew were the last always to enter the chapel.
First is a youth of eighteen, condemned for stealing in a dwelling-house goods valued above five pounds.
The next convict is clearly and unmistakably a villain.
He is a hardened offender, previously cast for life, reprieved, transported to Australia, and since returned without pardon.
For this offense the punishment is death.
He has, however, doubly earned his sentence, and is actually condemned for burglary committed since his arrival in England.
His look at the sheriffs and the ordinary is full of scorn and defiance.
The last of the four is said to have been a clergyman of the Church of England, condemned for forgery, "a miserable old man in a tattered suit of black.
Already he is half dead.
Great efforts have been made to save his life.
Friends, even utter strangers, have interceded for him, and to the last he has buoyed himself up by hope of reprieve.
Now his doom is sealed irrevocably, and he has given himself up to despair.
The morning hymn is sung first, as if to remind the condemned that next morning at eight a.m. they are to die.
The service proceeds. At last the burial service is reached.
The youth alone is able to read, but from long want of practice he is at a loss to find the place in his prayer-book.
The youth's hands tremble as they hold the book upside down.
The burglar is heard to mutter an angry oath.
The sheep-stealer smiles, and, extending his arms upwards, looks with a glad expression to the roof of the chapel.
The forger has never moved.
Let us pass on.
We come to the sermon.
The sermon of this day, whether eloquent or plain, useful or useless, must produce a striking effect at the moment of its delivery.
The dying men are dreadfully agitated.
The poor sheep-stealer is in a frenzy.
Suddenly he utters a short sharp scream, and all is still.
The sheriffs cover their faces, and one of their inquisitive friends blows his nose with his glove.
The keeper tries to appear unmoved, but his eye wanders anxiously over the combustible assembly.
The children round the communion-table stare and gape with childish wonder.
Mr. Wakefield winds up his graphic but somewhat sensational account by describing another religious service, which may appropriately be inserted here.
He says, "On the day of execution there is no service in the chapel of Newgate.
On the following day the capital convicts, whose companions have been hanged, are required to return thanks for their narrow escape.
Hardly any one.
This very proper rule was, however, set aside on the Sunday preceding Courvoisier's execution.
Cards were issued, and to such an extent, that although the service was not to commence till half-past ten, by nine a.m.
Lord Paget, Lord Bruce, several members of the House of Commons, and a few ladies.
Contemporary accounts give a minute description of the demeanor of the convict upon this solemn occasion.
He sat on a bench before the pulpit, -- the hideous condemned pew had been swept away, -- and never once raised his eyes during the service.
So far as I can find, Courvoisier was the last condemned criminal who was thus exhibited to a crowd of morbidly curious spectators.
The atrocity of the murder no doubt attracted extraordinary attention to it.
The crowd outside Newgate on the day of execution has already been described; but there was also a select gathering of distinguished visitors within the jail.
First came the sheriffs, the under-sheriffs, and several aldermen and city officials, then Lord Powerscourt and several other peers of the realm.
But there is little doubt that as executions became more rare they made more impression on the public mind.
Nevertheless, after that date no person whatever was executed for this offense.
Gradually the application of capital punishment became more and more restricted, and was soon the penalty for murder alone.
Seven other crimes, however, were still capital by law, and so continued till the passing of the Criminal Consolidation Acts of 1861.
With the amelioration of the criminal code, other cruel concomitants of execution also disappeared.
Pennant speaks of Surgeons' Hall as a handsome building, ornamented with Ionic pilasters, and with a double flight of steps to the first floor.
Beneath is a door for the admission of the bodies of murderers and other felons. There were other public dissecting rooms for criminals.
One was attached to Hicks' Hall, the Clerkenwell Sessions House, built out of monies provided by Sir Baptist Hicks, a wealthy alderman of the reign of James I.
Surgeons' Hall being let to the lieutenancy of the county for the accommodation of the militia.
A long procession was formed, headed by constables, who cleared the way with their staves.
The countenance of Williams was ghastly in the extreme, and the whole had an appearance too horrible for description.
All the shops in the neighborhood were shut, and the windows and tops of the houses were crowded with spectators.
But there was an attempt to revive it at that date, when the act for dispensing with the dissection of criminals was passed.
Later on, after dark, some friends of the deceased stole the body and buried it in the sand, and this was the end of hanging in chains.
After this a law was passed which prescribed that the bodies of all executed murderers should be buried within the walls of the jail.
The rope still broke sometimes, although it was not often that the horrid scene seen at Jersey at the beginning of the century was repeated.
After this the sheriffs sent for another rope, but the spectators interfered, and the man was carried back to jail.
The whole case was referred to the king, and the poor wretch, whose crime had been a military one, was eventually pardoned.
A somewhat similar event happened at Chester not long afterwards; the ropes by which two offenders were turned off broke a few inches from their necks.
Good people, do not be hurried; I am not, I can wait.
Similar cases were not wanting as regards the executions before Newgate. Others were not less horrible, although there was no failure of apparatus.
Sometimes the condemned man made a hard fight for life.
White managed to keep his wrists asunder, and continued to struggle with the officials for some time. Eventually he was pinioned with a cord in the usual manner.
On the scaffold he made a violent attempt to loosen his bonds, and succeeded in getting his hands free.
Then with a strong effort he pushed off the white cap, and tried to liberate his neck from the halter, which by this time had been adjusted.
The hangman summoned assistance, and with help tied the cap over White's face with a handkerchief.
The miserable wretch during the whole of this time was struggling with the most determined violence, to the great horror of the spectators.
Still he resisted.
However, the ceremony went forward, and when the signal was given the drop sank.
The wretched man did not fall with it, but jumped on to the platform, and seizing the rope with his hands, tried to avoid strangulation.
His face was visible to the whole crowd, and was fearful to behold.
Calcraft, the moment he had adjusted the cap and rope, ran down the steps, drew the bolt, and disappeared.
Bousfield slowly drew himself up, and rested with his feet on the right side of the drop.
One of the turnkeys rushed forward and pushed him off.
Again the wretched creature succeeded in obtaining foothold, but this time on the left side of the drop.
He was at first engaged as assistant to the executioner Tom Cheshire, but in due course rose to be chief.
He was always known as a mild-mannered man of simple tastes, much given to angling in the New River, and a devoted rabbit fancier.
He was well known in the neighborhood where he resided, and the street gamins cried "Jack Ketch" as he went along the street.
While Calcraft was in office other aspirants to fame appeared in the field.
It was not always easy to hire a hangman.
The man to be hanged belonged to Wales, and no Welshman would do the job.
Another man was hired, himself a convict, whose fees for self and wife were twelve guineas.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 13: Newgate notorieties, part 1.
In chapter two of the present volume I brought down the record of crime to the second decade of the present century.
Certain crimes, those against the person especially, diminished gradually. They became less easy or remunerative.
People, too, were getting into the habit of carrying but little cash about them, and no valuables but their watches or personal jewelery.
Street robberies offered fewer inducements to depredators, and evil-doers were compelled to adopt other methods of preying upon their fellows.
There was no increase in murder or manslaughter; the number of such crimes remained pretty constant proportionately to population.
Nor did the methods by which they were perpetrated greatly vary from those in times past.
Pegsworth, and Greenacre, and Daniel Good merely reproduced types that had gone before, and that have since reappeared.
Esther Hibner was as inhuman in her ill-usage of the parish apprentice she killed as Martha Brownrigg had been.
Thurtell and Hunt followed in the footsteps of Billings, Wood, and Catherine Hayes.
Courvoisier might have lived a century earlier.
Hocker was found upon the scene of his crime, irresistibly attracted thither, as was Theodore Gardelle.
These crimes had their origin too often in the disordered brains of lunatics at large, like Captain Goode.
Their perpetrators were charged with high treason, but met with merciful clemency as irresponsible beings.
But at various dates treason more distinct and tangible came to the front: attempts to levy war against the State.
But the Chartists sought their ends by riot and rebellion, and gained only imprisonment for their pains.
Some five hundred in all were arrested, but as only three of these were lodged in Newgate, I shall not recur to them in my narrative.
The Cato Street conspiracy would have been simply ridiculous but for the recklessness of the desperadoes who planned it.
That some thirty or more needy men should hope to revolutionize England is a sufficient proof of the absurdity of their attempt.
But they proceeded in all seriousness, and would have shrunk from no outrage or atrocity in furtherance of their foolhardy enterprise.
It was during this period that he was said to have imbibed his revolutionary ideas.
After this he tried farming, but failed.
He married again and came to London, where he soon became notorious as a reckless gambler and a politician holding the most extreme views.
In this way he formed the acquaintance of Watson and others, with whom he was arraigned for treasonable practices, and imprisoned.
On his release he sent a challenge to Lord Sidmouth, the Home Secretary, and was again arrested and imprisoned.
The Government obtained early and full information of the nefarious scheme.
The day appointed for the murder and rising actually arrived before the authorities interfered.
It was the day on which Lord Harrowby was to entertain his colleagues at dinner in Grosvenor Square.
While a few secured the servants, the rest were to fall upon Lord Harrowby and his guests.
Edgeware Road, completing their dispositions for assuming supreme power after the blow had been struck.
Here they were surprised by the police, headed by a magistrate, and supported by a strong detachment of Her Majesty's Guards.
The police were the first to arrive on the spot, the Guards having entered the street at the wrong end.
The conspirators were in a loft, approached by a ladder and a trap-door, access through which could only be obtained one by one.
The Guards, headed by Lord Adolphus Fitz Clarence, now reinforced the police, and the conspirators gave way.
Nine of the latter were captured, with all the war material, cutlasses, pistols, hand-grenades, and ammunition.
Thistlewood and fourteen more succeeded for the moment in making their escape, but most of them were subsequently taken.
Thistlewood was discovered next morning in a mean house in White Street, Moorfields.
The trial of the conspirators came on some six weeks later, at the Old Bailey.
Thistlewood made a long and rambling defense, the chief features of which were abuse of Lord Sidmouth, and the vilification of the informer Edwards.
A crowd as great as any known collected in the Old Bailey to see the ceremony, about which there were some peculiar features worth recording.
Come, old cock-of-wax, it will soon be over.
He told the executioner to "do it tidy," to pull it tight, and was in a state of hysterical exaltation up to the very last.
After the five bodies had hung for half-an-hour, a man in a mask came forward to complete the sentence.
Be this as it may, the weapon used was only an ordinary axe, which rather indicates that force, not skill, was employed.
These were the last executions for high treason, but not the last prisoners by many who passed through Newgate charged with sedition.
Attacks upon the sovereign, as I have said, became more common after the accession of the young Queen Victoria in 1838.
He was eventually sentenced to death, but the plea of lunacy was allowed, and he was confined for life.
From this he was promoted to barman, and as such had charge of the business in various public-houses.
His acquaintances often asked his object in this, but he kept his own counsel till the 10th June.
On that day Oxford was on the watch at Buckingham Palace.
About six p.m. the royal carriage, a low open vehicle drawn by four horses, ridden by postilions, left the palace.
Oxford, who had been pacing backwards and forwards with his hands under the lapels of his coat, saw the carriage approach.
He was on the right or north side of the road. Prince Albert occupied the same side of the carriage, the Queen the left.
As the carriage came up to him Oxford turned, put his hand into his breast, drew a pistol, and fired at the Queen.
The shot missed, and as the carriage passed on, Oxford drew a second pistol and fired again.
Meanwhile the pistol-shots had attracted the attention of the bystanders, of whom there was a fair collection, as usual, waiting to see the Queen pass.
Oxford was seized by a person named Lowe, who was at first mistaken for the assailant.
But Oxford at once assumed the responsibility for his crime, saying, "It was I. I did it. I'll give myself up.
There is no occasion to use violence. I will go with you.
He was taken into custody, and removed first to a police cell, thence committed to Newgate, after he had been examined before the Privy Council.
Oxford expressed little anxiety or concern.
He asked more than once whether the Queen was hurt, and acknowledged that the pistols were loaded with ball.
A craze for notoriety, to be achieved at any cost, was the one absorbing idea in young Oxford's disordered brain.
He smiled continually, and when the indictment was read, burst into loud and discordant fits of laughter.
His father, it was proved in evidence, had been at times quite mad; and Oxford's mental state might be inferred from his own proceedings.
Louis and Amadeus among the captains; and Hercules, Neptune, and Mars among the lieutenants of the association.
The various grades were distinguished by cockades and bows of different colors.
The society was supposed to meet regularly, and its proceedings, together with the speeches made, were duly recorded.
While one stood over the fire with the papers, another stood with lighted torch to fire the house.
We then sent the old woman to open the door, and it proved to be some little boys who had knocked and ran away.
You must attend; and if your master will not give you leave, you must come in defiance of him.
No serious importance could be attached to these, the manifest inventions of a disordered intellect.
He went from Newgate first to Bethlehem, from which he was removed to Broadmoor on the opening of the great criminal lunatic asylum at that place.
He was released from Broadmoor in 1878, and went abroad.
His motives for thus imitating the dastardly crime of Oxford are shrouded in obscurity.
He could not plead insanity like his predecessor, and no attempt was made at his trial to prove him of unsound mind.
The deed was long premeditated, and would have been executed a day earlier had not his courage failed him at the last moment.
Pearson weakly allowed Francis to go off without securing his apprehension, but later he gave full information.
Francis had already been seized by a policeman named Trounce, who saw his movement with the pistol, but too late to prevent its discharge.
The prisoner was conveyed without delay to the Home Office, and there examined by the Privy Council, which had been hastily summoned for the purpose.
On searching him the pistol was found in his pocket, the barrel still warm; also some loose powder and a bullet.
The enthusiasm of the people at the Queen's escape was uproarious, and her drive next day was one long triumphal progress.
At the Italian Opera in the evening the audience, on the Queen's appearance, greeted her with loud cheers, and called for the national anthem.
This was in May 1842.
The policemen treated the matter as a hoax, and allowed the culprit to make off.
A visit to the father's residence was followed by the arrest of the son, who had by this time returned.
This son, John William Bean, was fully identified by Dasset, and presently examined by the Privy Council.
He was eventually charged with a misdemeanor, the capital charge having been abandoned, and committed for trial.
I shall mention briefly one more case, in which, however, there was no murderous intent, before I pass on to other crimes.
That offense was a brutal assault upon Her Majesty, whom he struck in the face with a small stick just as she was leaving Cambridge House.
The blow crushed the bonnet and bruised the forehead of the Queen, who was happily not otherwise injured.
The increase of bank forgeries, and its cause, I referred to in a previous chapter.
At one session of the Old Bailey, in 1821, no less than thirty-five true bills were found for passing forged notes.
But there were other notorious cases of forgery.
Mr. Fauntleroy was a member of a banking firm, which his father had established in conjunction with a gentleman of the name of Marsh, and others.
I kept up the payments of the dividends, but made no entries of such payments in my books.
The bank began first to refuse our acceptances, and to destroy the credit of our house; the bank shall smart for it.
Once he ran a narrow risk of being found out.
A lady in the country, who had £13,000 in the stocks, desired her London agent to sell them out.
Nothing more was heard of the affair, although the lady declared that she had never instructed Fauntleroy to sell.
A newspaper report of the time describes Fauntleroy as a well-made man of middle stature.
His hair, though gray, was thick, and lay smooth over his forehead.
His countenance had an expression of most subdued resignation.
The impression which his appearance altogether was calculated to make was that of the profoundest commiseration.
A run upon the bank immediately followed, which was only met by a suspension of payment and the closing of its doors.
Fauntleroy was scouted as a licentious libertine, a deep and determined gamester, a spendthrift whose extravagance knew no bounds.
The veil was lifted from his private life, and he was accused of persistent immorality.
These arguments availed little with the jury, who after a short deliberation found Fauntleroy guilty, and he was sentenced to death.
Appeals were made to the Home Secretary, and all possible political interest brought to bear, but without success.
I find in the chaplain's journal, under date 1824, various entries relative to this prisoner.
Visited Mr. Fauntleroy. My application for books for him not having been attended, I had no prayer-book to give him.
The kindliness of the city authorities to Fauntleroy was not limited to the assignment of a separate place of durance.
As I have already said, they took the chaplain seriously to task for the bad taste shown in the condemned sermon preached before Fauntleroy.
Wherefore let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall," and was full of the most pointed allusions to the culprit.
The sermon ended with an appeal to the dying man, exhorting him to penitence.
This "personality," and it can be called by no other name, is carefully excluded from prison pulpit utterances on the eve of an execution.
Edmund Angelini, to take Fauntleroy's place.
He was summoned to the Mansion House, where he repeated his request, crying, "Accordez moi cette grâce," with much urgency.
There were doubts of his sanity.
He wrote afterwards to the effect that the moment he had offered himself, an unknown assassin came to aim a blow at him.
Let this monster give his name; I am ready to fight him. I am still determined to put myself in the place of Mr. Fauntleroy.
If the law of this country can receive such a sacrifice, my death will render to heaven an innocent man, and to earth a repentant sinner.
Fauntleroy was not entirely dependent upon the ordinary for ghostly counsel in his extremity.
He was also attended by the Rev. Mr. Springett and the indefatigable Mr. Baker, whose name has already been mentioned.
When led out on the morning of his execution, these two last-named gentlemen each took hold of one of his arms, and so accompanied him to the scaffold.
The concourse in front of Newgate was enormous, but much sympathy was evinced for this unfortunate victim to human weakness and ruthless laws.
A report was, moreover, widely circulated, and the impression long prevailed, that he actually escaped death.
There were two notable capital convictions for forgery in 1828.
One was that of Captain Montgomery, who assumed the aliases of Colonel Wallace and Colonel Morgan.
His offense was uttering forged notes, and there was strong suspicion that he had long subsisted entirely by this fraud.
The act for which he was taken into custody was the payment of a forged ten-pound note for half-a-dozen silver spoons.
His first forgery was the marvelous imitation of the signature of the Hon. Mr. Neville, M.P., who wrote an extremely cramped and curious hand.
For a long time justice did not overtake him for any criminal offense, but he was frequently in Newgate and in the King's Bench for debt.
He then took to forging bank-notes, and was arrested as I have described above.
Montgomery was duly sentenced to death, but he preferred suicide to the gallows. After sentence his demeanor was serious yet firm.
But next morning he was found dead in his cell.
This phial he had managed to retain in his possession in spite of the frequent searches to which he was subjected in Newgate.
The second conviction for forgery in 1828 was that of the Quaker Joseph Hunton, a man of previously the highest repute in the city of London.
He had prospered in early life, was a slop-seller on a large scale at Bury St. Edmunds, and a sugar-baker in the metropolis.
Hunton tried to fly the country on the detection of the fraud, but was arrested at Plymouth just as he was on the point of leaving England in the New York packet.
Hunton was put upon his trial at the Old Bailey, and in due course sentenced to death.
His defense was that the forged acceptances would have been met on coming to maturity, and that he had no real desire to defraud.
Hunton accepted his sentence with great resignation, although he protested against the inhumanity of the laws which condemned him to death.
He was, however, visited by and received his wife, and several members of the Society of Friends.
Mr. Sparks Moline, came to attend him to the scaffold.
Hunton's execution no doubt aroused public attention to the cruelty and futility of the capital law against forgery.
In 1829 the gallows claimed two more victims for this offense.
One was Richard Gifford, a well-educated youth who had been at Christ's Hospital, and afterwards in the National Debt Office.
Unfortunately he took to drink, lost his appointment, and fell from bad to worse.
Suddenly, after being at the lowest depths, he emerged, and was found by his friends living in comfort in the Waterloo Road.
His funds, which he pretended came to him with a rich wife, were really the proceeds of frauds upon the Bank of England.
The other and the last criminal executed for forgery in this country was one Maynard, who was convicted of a fraud upon the Custom House.
Maynard was convicted of uttering the forged document, Jones of being an accessory; the third prisoner was acquitted.
Maynard was the only one who suffered death.
This was on the last day of 1829. In the following session Sir Robert Peel brought in a bill to consolidate the acts relating to forgery.
Macintosh's amendment was carried in the Commons, but the new law did not pass the Lords, who re-enacted the capital penalty.
It passed the Commons, but opposition was again encountered in the Lords.
There were at the moment in Newgate six convicts sentenced to death for forging wills.
The abduction of Miss Turner by the brothers Wakefield bore a strong resemblance to the carrying off and forcible marrying of heiresses as already described.
Edward Gibbon Wakefield, the prime mover in the abduction, was a barrister, not exactly briefless, but without a large practice.
He had, it was said, a good private income, and was already a widower with two children at the time of his committing the offense for which he was subsequently tried.
He had eloped with his first wife from school.
While on a visit to Macclesfield he heard by chance of Miss Turner, and that she would inherit all her father's possessions.
He thereupon conceived an idea of carrying her off and marrying her willy nilly at Gretna Green.
The two brothers started at once for Liverpool, where Miss Turner was at school with a Mrs. Daulby.
The road taken was via Manchester, where the servant said a Dr. Hull was to be picked up to go on with them to Shrigley.
At Manchester, however, the carriage stopped at the Albion Hotel.
Miss Turner was shown into a private room, where Mr. Wakefield soon presented himself.
Miss Turner, not knowing him, would have left the room, but he said he came from her father, and she remained.
Mr. Turner was on the verge of bankruptcy. He was at that moment at Kendal, and wished her to join him there at once.
Miss Turner consented to go on, and they traveled night and day towards the north.
Wakefield found it necessary to become more explicit regarding her father's affairs.
He now pretended that Mr. Turner was also on his way to the border, pursued by sheriffs' officers.
The fact was, Wakefield went on to say, an uncle of his had advanced Mr. Turner £60,000, which had temporarily staved off ruin.
Wakefield added that it had been suggested he should marry Miss Turner, but that he had laughed at the idea.
Wakefield's uncle took the matter more seriously, and declared that unless the marriage came off Mr. Turner must be sold up.
Miss Turner, thus pressed, consented to go on to Gretna Green.
Passing through Carlisle, she was told that Mr. Turner was in the town, but could not show himself.
Nothing could release him from his trouble but the arrival of the marriage certificate from Gretna Green.
Returning to Carlisle, she now heard that her father had been set free, and had gone home to Shrigley, whither they were to follow him.
On arrival, Wakefield pretended that they had missed Mr. Turner, and must follow him over to France.
The strangely-married couple thereupon pressed on to Dover, and crossed over to Calais.
The fact of the abduction did not transpire for some days.
Then Mrs. Daulby learnt that Miss Turner had not arrived at Shrigley, but that she had gone to Manchester.
Friends went in pursuit and traced her to Huddersfield and further north.
The terror and dismay of her parents were soon intensified by the receipt of a letter from Wakefield, at Carlisle, announcing the marriage.
An uncle of Miss Wakefield's, accompanied by his solicitor and a Bow Street runner, at once went in pursuit.
The game, however, was nearly up. Miss Turner was met by her uncle on Calais pier as she was walking with Wakefield.
The uncle claimed her. The husband resisted.
Monsieur le Maire was appealed to, and decided to leave it to the young lady, who at once abandoned Wakefield.
On this Wakefield gave in.
He surrendered the bride who had never been a wife, and she returned to England with her friends, while Wakefield went on alone to Paris.
The prosecution pressed for a severe penalty. Edward Wakefield pleaded that his trial had already cost him £3000.
William Wakefield in Lancaster Jail, and Edward Gibbon Wakefield in Newgate, which sentences were duly enforced.
He also wrote and published a pamphlet from the jail to show that Miss Turner had been a consenting party to the marriage, and was really his wife.
Neither his address nor his pamphlet availed much, for the bill for the divorce passed both Houses.
After their release from Lancaster and Newgate respectively, both Wakefields went abroad.
Mr. E. G. Wakefield took part in the scheme for the colonization of North Australia, and for some years resided in that colony.
Miss Turner subsequently married Mr. Legh of Lym Hall, Cheshire.
The jewelers were always a favorite prey of the London thieves.
Shops were broken into, as when that of Grimaldi and Johnson, in the Strand, was robbed of watches to the value of £6000.
Where robbery with violence was intended, the perpetrators had now to adopt various shifts and contrivances to secure their victim.
No more curious instance of this ever occurred than the assault made by one Howard upon a Mr. Mullay, with intent to rob him.
The latter had advertised, offering a sum of £1000 to anyone who would introduce him to some mercantile equipment.
Howard replied, desiring Mr. Mullay to call upon him in a house in Red Lion Square.
Howard, strange to say, making no attempt to detain him; probably because Mullay promised to return a few days later, and to bring more money.
On this renewed visit Mr. Owen was still absent, and Mr. Mullay agreed to write him a note from a copy Howard gave him.
While thus engaged, Howard thrust the poker into the fire.
Mullay defended himself, and managed to break the knife, but not before he had cut himself severely.
Howard swore he would finish him, but proved the weaker of the two, and Mullay got him down on the floor.
By this time the neighbors were aroused, and several people came to the scene of the affray.
Howard was secured, given into custody, and committed to Newgate.
It was, however, proved that Howard was in needy circumstances, and that his proposals to Mr. Mullay could only have originated in a desire to rob him.
He was found guilty of an assault with intent, and sentenced to transportation for fourteen years.
A more complicated and altogether most extraordinary case of assault, with intent to extort money, occurred a few years later.
Mr. Gee, of Bishop Stortford, who administered the estate of a certain Mr. Canning, deceased.
This Mr. Canning had left his widow a life interest in £2000 so long as she remained unmarried.
The money went after her to her children.
Mr. Gee went in the coach sent for him, and alighted at 27, York Street, West, Commercial Road.
The coach immediately drove off; Mr. Gee entered the house, asked for Mr. Heath, was told he would find him in the back kitchen at breakfast.
There he was seated on some sort of wooden bench and securely fastened.
Mr. Gee at first stoutly refused.
One was a cheque for £800 on his bankers, the other an order to Mr. Bell of Newport, Essex, requesting the surrender of a deed.
His captors having thus succeeded in their designs, left him, no doubt to realize the money.
The door of his place of durance stood open, and Mr. Gee began to consider whether he might not escape.
His first act was to send a messenger to stop the cheque and the order to Mr. Bell, his next to seek the help of the police.
Two Bow Street runners were dispatched to the house in York Street, which had evidently been taken on purpose for the outrage.
There was no furniture in the place, and the den in the kitchen had been recently and specially constructed of boards of immense strength and thickness.
It was a cell five feet by three, within another, the intervening being filled with rammed earth to deaden the sound.
On the arrival of the police the house was empty.
The two men on guard had gone off immediately after Mr. Gee had escaped, but they returned later in the day, and were apprehended.
A watch was set on him at her house, where he was soon afterwards arrested.
Edwards, whom Mr. Gee easily identified with the others, at once admitted that he was the prime mover of the conspiracy.
He had sought by all legal means to obtain possession of the £2000, but had failed, and had had recourse to more violent means.
All three men were committed for trial, although Edwards wished to exculpate the others as having only acted under his order.
At the trial the indictment charging them with felony could not be sustained, but they were found guilty of conspiracy and assault.
Weedon and Lecasser to twelve and six months respectively in Coldbath Fields.
At no period could thieves in London or elsewhere have prospered had they been unable to dispose of their ill-gotten goods.
The trade of fence, or receiver, therefore, is very nearly as old as the crimes which it so obviously fostered.
One of the most notorious, and for a time most successful practitioners in this illicit trade, passed through Newgate in 1831.
The name of Ikey Solomons was long remembered by thief and thief-taker.
He early saw the profits to be made out of purchasing stolen goods, but could not embark in it at first for want of capital.
He was taken up when still in his teens for stealing a pocketbook, and was sentenced to transportation, but did not get beyond the hulks at Chatham.
With this capital he returned to London and set up as a fence.
But he never paid more than a fixed price for all articles of the same class, whatever their intrinsic value.
Thus, a watch was paid for as a watch, whether it was of gold or silver; a piece of linen as such, whether the stuff was coarse or fine.
This rule in dealing with stolen goods continues to this day, and has made the fortune of many since Ikey.
Solomons also established a system of provincial agency, by which stolen goods were passed on from London to the seaports, and so abroad.
He lived in Rosemary Lane, and sometimes he had as much as £20,000 worth of goods secreted on the premises.
The second house was in Lower Queen Street, Islington, and he used it for some time as a depot for valuables.
He was about to emigrate to New South Wales, when he was arrested at Islington and committed to Newgate on a charge of receiving stolen goods.
While thus incarcerated he managed to escape from custody, but not actually from jail, by an ingenious contrivance which is worth mentioning.
He claimed to be admitted to bail, and was taken from Newgate on a writ of habeas before one of the judges sitting at Westminster.
He was conveyed in a coach driven by a confederate, and under the escort of a couple of turnkeys.
While there he was joined by his wife and other friends.
After a short carouse the prisoner went into Westminster, his case was heard, bail refused, and he was ordered back to Newgate.
But he once more persuaded the turnkeys to pause at the public, where more liquor was consumed.
When the journey was resumed, Mrs. Solomons accompanied her husband in the coach. Half-way to Newgate she was taken with a fit.
On stopping at a door in this low street, Ikey jumped out, ran into the house, slamming the door behind him.
He passed through and out at the back, and was soon beyond pursuit.
By-and-by the turnkeys, sobered by their loss, returned to Newgate alone, and pleaded in excuse that they had been drugged.
Ikey left no traces, and the police could hear nothing of him. He had in fact gone out of the country, to Copenhagen, whence he passed on to New York.
But Mrs. Solomons could not resist the temptation to dabble in stolen goods, and she was found shipping watches of the wrong category to New York.
For this she received a sentence of fourteen years' transportation, and was sent to Van Diemen's Land.
Ikey joined her at Hobart Town, where they set up a general shop, and soon began to prosper.
He was indicted on eight charges, two only of which were substantiated, but on each of them he received a sentence of seven years' transportation.
At his own request he was reconveyed to Hobart Town, where his son had been carrying on the business.
Whether Ikey was "assigned" to his own family is not recorded, but no doubt he succeeded to his own property when the term of servitude had expired.
No doubt, on the removal of Ikey Solomons from the scene, his mantle fell upon worthy successors.
One of the largest robberies of its class was that effected upon the Custom House in the winter of 1834.
A large amount of specie was nearly always retained here in the department of the Receiver of Fines.
This was known to some clerks in the office, who began to consider how they might lay hands on a lot of cash.
Jordan and Sullivan, who at once set to work in a business-like way to obtain impressions of the keys of the strong room and chest.
But before committing themselves to an attempt on the latter, it was of importance to ascertain how much it usually contained.
For this purpose Jordan waited on the receiver to make a small payment, for which he tendered a fifty-pound note.
The chest was opened to give change, and a heavy tray lifted out which plainly held some £4000 in cash.
He went out next morning with the booty when the doors were re-opened, and attracted no attention.
The spoil was fairly divided; part of the notes were disposed of to a traveling "receiver," who passed over to the Continent and there cashed them easily.
While the excitement was still fresh, a new robbery of diamonds was committed at a bonded warehouse in the immediate neighborhood, on Custom House Quay.
The jewels had belonged to a Spanish countess recently deceased, who had sent them to England for greater security on the outbreak of the first Carlist war.
These were deposited in an iron chest of great strength on the second floor.
The thieves it was supposed had secreted themselves in the warehouse during business hours, and waited till night to carry out their plans.
Some ham sandwiches, several cigar ends, and two empty champagne bottles were found on the premises next day, showing how they had passed their time.
They had had serious work to get at the diamonds. It was necessary to force one heavy door from its hinges, and to cut through the thick panels of another.
The thieves were satisfied with the diamonds; they broke open other cases containing gold watches and plate, but abstracted nothing.
The police were of opinion that these robberies were both the work of the same hand.
But it was not until the autumn that they traced some of the notes stolen from the Custom House to Jordan and Sullivan.
About this time also suspicion fell upon Huey, one of the clerks, who was arrested soon afterwards, and made a clean breast of the whole affair.
There was a hunt for the two well-known house-breakers, who were eventually heard of at a lodging in Kennington.
But they at once made tracks, and took up their residence under assumed names in a tavern in Bloomsbury.
The police lost all trace of them for some days, but at length Sullivan's brother was followed from the house in Kennington to the above-mentioned tavern.
A fire was lit in it, and the maid in doing so threw a lot of rubbish, as it seemed, which had accumulated under the grate, on top of the burning coals.
By-and-by the occupant of the room noticed something glittering in the center of the fire, which, to inspect more closely, he took out with the tongs.
It was a large gold brooch set in pearls, but a portion of the mounting had melted with the heat.
A part of the "swag" stolen from the bonded warehouse was thus recovered, but it was supposed that a number of the stolen notes had perished in the fire.
The condign punishment meted out to these Custom House robbers had no deterrent effect seemingly.
Within three months, three new and most mysterious burglaries were committed at the West End, all in houses adjoining each other.
One was occupied by the Portuguese ambassador, who lost a quantity of jewelery from an escritoire, and his neighbors lost plate and cash.
Not the slightest clue to these large affairs was ever obtained, but it is probable that they were "put up" jobs, or managed with the complicity of servants.
The next year twelve thousand sovereigns were cleverly stolen in the Mile End Road.
The gold-dust robbery of 1839, the first of its kind, was cleverly and carefully planned with the assistance of a dishonest employee.
The fraudulent messenger, by the help of young Caspar, established his claim to the boxes, paid the wharfage dues, and carried off the gold-dust.
Presently the proper person arrived from the consignees, but found the gold-dust gone.
The police were at once employed, and after infinite pains they discovered the person, one Moss, who had acted as the messenger.
Solomons, had sold bar gold to the value of £1200 to certain bullion dealers.
Solomons was not straightforward in his replies as to where he got the gold, and he was soon placed in the dock with the Caspars and Moss.
Solomons was now also admitted as a witness, and his evidence, with that of Moss, secured the transportation of the principal actors in the theft.
In the course of the trial it came out that almost every one concerned except the Caspars had endeavored to defraud his accomplices.
Moses, it may be added, was a direct descendant of Ikey Solomons.
His arrest and conviction cast dismay over the whole gang of receivers, and for a time seriously checked the nefarious traffic.
It may be added that prison life did not agree with "Money Moses"; a striking change came over his appearance while in Newgate.
Before his confinement he had been a sleek round person, addicted obviously to the pleasures of the table.
I will now retrace my steps and give some account of the more remarkable murders during that period.
No murder has created greater sensation and horror throughout England than that of Mr. Weare by Thurtell, Hunt, and Probert.
The murder was still fresh in the memory of the populace, and Probert was all but lynched on his way to jail.
According to his statement, when sentenced to death, he had been driven to horse-stealing by the execration which had pursued him after the murder.
Every door had been closed against him, every hope of future support blasted.
The event which he styles calamitous we may well characterize as one of the most deliberately atrocious murders on record.
Thurtell was a gambler, and Weare had won a good deal of money from him.
Weare was supposed to carry a "private bank" about with him in a pocket in his under waistcoat.
To obtain possession of this, Thurtell with his two associates resolved to kill him.
The victim was invited to visit Probert's cottage in the country near Elstree.
Thurtell drove him down in a gig, "to be killed as he traveled," in Thurtell's own words.
The others followed, and on overtaking Thurtell, found he had done the job alone in a retired part of the road known as Gill's Hill Lane.
The murderer explained that he had first fired a pistol at Weare's head, but the shot glanced off his cheek.
Then he attacked the other's throat with a penknife, and last of all drove the pistol barrel into his forehead.
After the murder the villains divided the spoil, and went on to Probert's cottage, and supped off pork-chops brought down on purpose.
During the night they sought to dispose of the body by throwing it into a pond, but two days later had to throw it into another pond.
Probert was then admitted as a witness, and the case was fully proved against Thurtell, who was hanged in front of Hertford Jail.
Hunt, in consideration of the information he had given, escaped death, and was sentenced to transportation for life.
The crimes of these inhuman purveyors to medical science do not fall within the limits of this work.
Bishop was a carpenter, but having been suddenly thrown out of work, he joined his brother-in-law in his line of business.
Bishop got weary of the dangers and fatigues of exhumation, and proposed to Williams that instead of disinterring they should murder their subjects.
Bishop confessed that he was moved to this by the example of Burke and Hare.
They pursued their terrible trade for five years without scruple and without detection.
Eventually the law overtook them, but almost by accident.
This man, May, asked the porter at King's College if "he wanted anything?" the euphemism for offering a body.
The porter asked what he had got, and the answer was, a male subject.
The porter received it, but from its freshness became suspicious of foul play.
Mr. Partridge was sent for, and he with some of the students soon decided that the corpse had not died a natural death.
The snatchers were detained, the police sent for, and arrest followed as a matter of course.
Williams, and May had been concerned in the transaction.
Meanwhile, a search had been made at Nova Scotia Gardens, Bethnal Green, where Bishop and Williams lived.
He asserted that the victim was a Lincolnshire lad, and not an Italian boy, although the latter was fully proved.
According to the confession, death had been inflicted by drowning in a well, whereas the medical evidence all pointed to violence.
It was, however, pretty clear that this victim, like preceding ones, had been lured to Nova Scotia Gardens, and there drugged with a large dose of laudanum.
While they were in a state of insensibility the murder was committed.
Bishop's confession was endorsed by Williams, and the immediate result was the respite of May.
A very painful scene occurred in Newgate when the news of his escape from death was imparted to May.
He fainted, and the warrant of mercy nearly proved his death-blow. The other two looked on at his agitation with an indifference amounting to apathy.
The execution took place a week or two later, in the presence of such a crowd as had not been seen near Newgate for years.
The horror with which Greenacre's crime struck the town was unparalleled since the time when Catherine Hayes slew her husband.
There were many features of resemblance in these crimes.
Closer investigation proved that it belonged to the trunk already discovered on the 2nd February.
The murdered individual was thus identified. The next step was to ascertain where and with whom she had last been seen.
A woman named Gale, who lived with him, was arrested at the same time. The prisoners were examined at the Marylebone police court.
Suspicion grew almost to certainty as the evidence was unfolded.
Mrs. Brown was a washer-woman, supposed to be worth some money; hence Greenacre's offer of marriage.
She had realized all her effects, and brought them with her furniture to Greenacre's lodgings. The two when married were to emigrate to Hudson's Bay.
Whether it was greed or a quarrel that drove Greenacre to the desperate deed remains obscure.
He thought he had killed her, and in his terror began at once to consider how he might dispose of the body and escape arrest.
While she was senseless, but really still alive, he cut off her head, and dismembered the body in the manner already described.
The most ghastly part of the story is that which deals with his getting rid of the head.
It was not until he left the bus, and walked up by the Regent's Canal, that he conceived the idea of throwing the head into the water.
Greenacre, when tried at the Old Bailey, admitted that he had been guilty of manslaughter.
Mrs. Brown fell with it, and Greenacre, to his horror, found that she was dead.
The woman Gale was also found guilty, but sentence of death was only passed on Greenacre.
The execution was, as usual, attended by an immense concourse, and Greenacre died amidst the loudest execrations.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 16: Newgate notorieties continued, part 1.
As the century advanced crimes of fraud increased.
They not only became more numerous, but they were on a wider scale.
The most extensive and systematic robberies were planned and carried out so as long to escape detection.
This was the willful shipwreck and casting away of a vessel which, with her supposed cargo, had been heavily insured.
The 'Dryad' was a brig owned principally by two persons named Wallace, one a seaman, the other merchant.
She was freighted by the firm of Zulueta and Co. for a voyage to Santa Cruz.
It was fully proved in evidence that when the Dryad sailed she carried nothing but the cargo belonging to Zulueta and Co.
The larboard pump was suffered to remain choked up, and the long-boat was fitted with tackles and held ready for use at a moment's notice.
At a place called the Silver Keys he ran the ship on the reef.
But another ship, concluding that he was acting in ignorance, rendered him assistance.
The 'Dryad' was got off, repaired, and her voyage renewed to Santa Cruz.
Even then she might have been saved, but the captain would not suffer the crew to act. Nearly the whole of the cargo was lost as well as the ship.
The captain and crew, however, got safely to Jamaica, and so to England; the captain dying on the voyage home.
The crime soon became public.
Mate, carpenter, and crew were eager to disavow complicity, and voluntarily gave information.
The Wallaces were arrested, committed to Newgate, and tried at the Old Bailey.
The case was clearly proved against them, and both were sentenced to transportation for life.
While lying in Newgate, awaiting removal to the convict ship, both prisoners made full confessions.
According to their own statements the loss of the 'Dryad' was only one of six intentional shipwrecks with which they had been concerned.
The crime of fraudulent insurance they declared was very common, and the underwriters must have lost great sums in this way.
The other Wallace, the sailor, also traced his lapse into crime to evil counsel.
A clergyman nearly a century later followed in the steps of Dr. Dodd, but did not under more humane laws lose his life.
The Rev. W. Bailey, LL.D., was convicted at the Central Criminal Court, in February 1843, of forgery.
A notorious miser, Robert Smith, had recently died in Seven Dials, where he had amassed a considerable fortune.
The executors to the estate disputed the validity of this document.
The jury did not believe him, and the verdict was for the defendants.
Subsequently Bailey was arrested on a charge of forgery, and after a long trial found guilty. His sentence was transportation for life.
Joshua Fletcher a surgeon, and three others were charged with forging wills for the purpose of obtaining unclaimed stock in the funds.
There were two separate affairs.
The other, remaining unclaimed for ten years, was transferred at the end of that time to the commissioners for the reduction of the National Debt.
A second will, also forged, was propounded at Doctors Commons as that of a Mrs. Hunt of Bristol.
Mrs. Hunt had left money in the funds which remained unclaimed, and had been transferred, as in Miss Slack's case.
Here again the money, with ten years' interest, was handed over to Barber and another calling himself Thomas Hunt, an executor of the will.
A third similar fraud to the amount of £2000 was also brought to light.
Barber and Fletcher were both transported for life, although Fletcher declared that Barber was innocent, and had no guilty knowledge of what was being done.
Banks and bankers continued to be victimized.
Burgess fraudulently transferred consols to the above amount, standing in the name of Mr. Oxenford, to another party.
A person, Elder of course, who personated Oxenford, attended at the bank to complete the transfer and sell the stock.
Burgess, who was purposely on leave from the bank, effected the sale, which was paid for with a cheque for nearly the whole amount on Lubbock's Bank.
Thither Elder went alone, provided with a number of canvas and one large carpet-bag.
The same evening both started for Liverpool, and embarking on board the mail steamer 'Britannia,' escaped to the United States.
Burgess' continued absence was soon noticed at the bank.
Mr. Oxenford having denied that he had made any transfer of stock, the matter was at once put into the hands of the police.
At Halifax Forrester learnt that the men he wanted had gone on to Boston, thence to Buffalo and Canada, and back to Boston.
He found them at length residing at the latter place, one as a landed proprietor, the other as a publican.
Elder, the former, was soon apprehended at his house, but he evaded the law by hanging himself with his pocket-handkerchief.
Next day a person betrayed him for the reward, and he was soon captured.
Burgess was eventually brought back to England, tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to transportation for life.
Within a month or two the bank of Messrs. Rogers and Co., Clement's Lane, was broken into.
Robberies as daring in conception as they were boldly executed were common enough.
One night a quantity of plate was stolen from Windsor Castle; another time Buckingham Palace was robbed.
Of this class was the ingenious yet peculiarly simple robbery effected at the house of Lord Fitzgerald in Belgrave Square.
The thief walked into the house in Belgrave Square, and openly carried off the plate-chest, deposited it in a light cart at the door, and drove away.
Howse and his accomplice were arrested; the former was found guilty and sentenced to fifteen years, but the latter was acquitted.
Stealing plate was about this period the crime of a more aristocratic thief.
When one of these clubs was taken in at the Army and Navy, that establishment also suffered.
Suspicion fell at length upon Ashley, who was seen to handle the forks and spoons at table in a strange manner.
Ashley was arrested as he left the shop; the spoons were impounded, and it was found that the club monogram had been erased from them.
At most of the clubs the servants had been mulcted to make good lost plate, which had no doubt been stolen by the prisoner.
Part of the freight were four hundred rough diamonds valued at £4000.
Ker came at once to London, and, by the help of the landlord of a public-house in Smithfield and others, disposed of the whole of the diamonds.
The circumstances of this purchase of brilliants from a stranger at such an inadequate price was strongly commented upon at Ker's trial.
The moment it was discovered that the diamonds had disappeared, the affair was taken up by the police.
Lord William Russell lived alone in Norfolk Street, Park Lane. He was a widower, and seventy-three years of age.
One morning in May his lordship was found dead in his bed with his throat cut.
The housemaid suggested that they should see if his lordship was all right, and the three went to his bedroom.
While Courvoisier opened the shutters, the housemaid, approaching the bed, saw that the pillow was saturated with blood.
The discovery of the murdered man immediately followed. The neighborhood was alarmed, the police sent for, and a close inquiry forthwith commenced.
That Lord William Russell had committed suicide was at once declared impossible.
The researches of the police soon laid bare other suspicious facts.
The bundle found in the dining-room contained, with clothes, various small articles of plate and jewelery which a thief would probably have put into his pocket.
His lordship's watch was gone.
Further suspicion was caused by the position of a book and a wax candle by the bedside.
The valet's strange demeanor had attracted attention from the first.
He had hung over the body in a state of dreadful agitation, answering no questions, and taking no part in the proceedings.
Three days later a close search of the butler's pantry produced fresh circumstantial evidence.
This placed them in a position of much embarrassment. To have thrown up their brief would have been to have secured Courvoisier's conviction.
It will be remembered that the question whether Mr. Phillips had not exceeded the limits usually allowed to counsel was much debated at the time.
The jury without hesitation found Courvoisier guilty, and he was sentenced to death.
The prisoner's demeanor had greatly changed during the trial.
Coolness amounting almost to effrontery gave way to hopeless dejection.
Later in the day he tried to commit suicide by cramming a towel down his throat, but was prevented.
Next morning he made a full confession in presence of his attorney, and the governor, Mr. Cope.
In this he gave as the motives of his crime a quarrel he had with his master, who threatened to discharge him without a character.
Finally, on coming downstairs after bed-time, Lord William had found Courvoisier in the dining-room.
Courvoisier wished to commit suicide in Newgate, but was prevented by the vigilant supervision to which he was subjected while in jail.
The attempt was to have been made by opening a vein and allowing himself to bleed to death.
The Sunday night before his execution he would not go to bed when ordered.
The governor insisted, but Courvoisier showed great reluctance to strip.
The order was, however, at length obeyed, and the whole of the prisoner's clothes were minutely searched.
In the pocket of the coat Mr. Cope, the governor, found a neatly-folded cloth, and asked what it was for.
Courvoisier admitted that he had intended to bind it tightly round his arm and bleed himself to death in the night.
The prisoner replied that he had left it in the mattress of which he had just been deprived.
The bed was searched, but no piece of sharpened wood was found. It was thought that it might have been lost in changing the mattresses.
The cloth above referred to belonged to the inner seam of his trousers, which he had managed to tear out.
There is nothing to show that Courvoisier really contemplated self-destruction.
A murder which reproduced many of the features of that committed by Greenacre soon followed, and excited the public mind even more than that of Courvoisier's.
Daniel Good's crime might have remained long undiscovered but for his own careless stupidity.
He was coachman to a gentleman at Roehampton. One day he went into a pawnbroker's at Wandsworth, and bought a pair of breeches on credit.
At the same time he was seen to steal and secrete a pair of trousers. The shop-boy gave information.
Good was followed to his stables by a policeman, but obstinately denied the theft.
The policeman insisted on searching the premises, at which Good displayed some uneasiness.
This increased when the officer, accompanied by two others, a neighbor and a bailiff, entered one of the stables.
Good now offered to go to Wandsworth and satisfy the pawnbroker.
Just at this moment, however, the searchers found concealed under two trusses of hay a woman's headless and dismembered trunk.
At the constable's cry of alarm Good rushed from the stable and locked the door behind him.
Some time elapsed before the imprisoned party could force open the doors, and by then the fugitive had escaped.
Medical assistance having been summoned, it was ascertained how the dismemberment had been effected.
In the same room a large axe and saw were found covered with blood.
Inquiry into the character of Good exposed him as a loose liver, who "kept company" with several women.
The victim was the first of these three.
Good had told her, much to her perturbation, that she was to move from South Street to Roehampton, and one day he fetched her.
They were seen together on Barnes Common, and again in Putney Park Lane, where they were talking loud and angrily.
The poor creature was never seen again alive.
The actual method of the murder was never exactly ascertained.
The woman where he lodged noticed that he was very restless at night, moaning and sighing much. Detection came unexpectedly.
He was recognized by an ex-policeman who had known him at Roehampton, and immediately arrested.
Good was committed to Newgate, and tried at the Central Criminal Court before a crowded court.
Good ladies and gentlemen all, I have a great deal more to say, but I am so bad I cannot say it.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 17: Newgate notorieties continued, part 2.
Hocker's murder is in its way interesting, as affording another proof of the extraordinary way in which the culprit returned to the scene of his guilt.
While the body lay there still warm, battered and bleeding from the cruel blows inflicted upon him by his cowardly assailant, a man came by singing.
He entered into conversation with the policemen, and learnt, as it seemed for the first time, what had happened.
His remark was, "It is a nasty job;" he took hold of the dead hand, and confessed that he felt "queer" at the shocking sight.
Even then he followed it as far as Belsize Lane.
It was here that the others engaged in their dismal office in removing the dead first got a good look at the stranger's face.
He wanted a light for a cigar, and got it from a lantern which was lifted up and fully betrayed his features.
A letter, which afforded an additional clue, was also found in the pocket of the deceased. Still it was many weeks before any arrest was made.
In the mean time the police were not idle.
It came out by degrees that the person who had been seen in Belsize Lane on the night the body was found was a friend of the deceased.
His name was Hocker; he was by trade a ladies' shoemaker; and it was also ascertained that after the day of the murder he was flush of money.
This was Delarue's watch, fully identified as such, which Hocker told his brother Delarue had given him the morning of the murder.
These were damnatory facts which well supported the prosecution.
When her ruin was discovered her brother panted for revenge.
Hocker and the brother went to the spot, where the latter left him to meet his sister's seducer alone.
Hocker's conduct in Newgate while under sentence of death was most extraordinary.
Hocker made several pretended confessions and revelations, all of which were proved to be absolutely false by the police on inquiry.
His demeanor was a strange compound of wickedness, falsehood, and deceit.
But at the fatal hour his hardihood forsook him, and he was almost insensible when taken out of his cell for execution.
There was an epidemic of murder in the United Kingdom about 1848 to 9.
In November of the first-named year occurred the wholesale slaughter of the Jermys in their house, Stanfield Hall, by the miscreant Rush.
London did not escape the contagion, and prominent among the detestable crimes of the period stands that of the Mannings at Bermondsey.
These great criminals suffered at Horsemonger Lane Jail, but they were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and were for some time inmates of Newgate.
Their victim was a man named Patrick O'Connor, a Custom-House gauger, who had been a suitor of Marie de Roux before she became Mrs. Manning.
He had failed in this as well as in the business of a publican, which he had at one time adopted.
After the marriage a close intimacy was still maintained between O'Connor and the Mannings.
He lived at Mile End, whence he walked often to call at 3, Minver Place, Bermondsey, the residence of his old love.
His wealth was well known to "Maria," as he called Mrs. Manning, who made several ineffectual attempts to get money out of him.
At last this fiendish woman made up her mind to murder O'Connor and appropriate all his possessions.
Meanwhile this woman, unflinching in her cold, bloody determination, carefully laid all her plans for the consummation of the deed.
One fine afternoon in August, O'Connor was met walking in the direction of Bermondsey.
He was dressed with particular care, as he was to dine at the Mannings and meet friends, one a young lady.
He was seen afterwards smoking and talking with his hosts in their back parlor, and never seen again alive.
Manning gave the coup de grace with a crowbar.
This job was not completed till the following day, as the hole had to be enlarged, and the only tool they had was a dust-shovel.
A quantity of quicklime was thrown in with the body to destroy all identification.
This was on a Thursday evening.
For the remainder of that week and part of the next the murderers stayed in the house, and occupied the kitchen, close to the remains of their victim.
On the Sunday Mrs. Manning roasted a goose at this same kitchen fire, and ate it with relish in the afternoon.
This cold-blooded indifference after the event was only outdone by the premeditation of this horrible murder.
Discovery of the murder came in this wise. O'Connor, a punctual and well-conducted official, was at once missed at the London Docks.
The Mannings had seen or heard nothing of him, of course. As O'Connor still did not turn up, the police after a couple of days returned to Minver Place.
The house was empty, bare and stripped of all its furniture, and its former occupants had decamped.
The circumstance was suspicious, and a search was at once made of the whole premises.
Six inches lower the body of O'Connor was uncovered.
He was lying on his face, his legs tied up to his hips so as to allow of the body fitting into the hole.
The lime had done its work so rapidly that the features would have been indistinguishable but for the prominent chin and a set of false teeth.
The corpse settled all doubts, and the next point was to lay hands upon the Mannings.
It was soon ascertained that the wife had gone off in a cab with a quantity of luggage.
Part of this she had deposited to be left till called for at one station, while she had gone herself to another, that at Euston Square.
At the first the boxes were impounded, opened, and found to contain many of O'Connor's effects.
At the second exact information was obtained of Mrs. Manning's movements. She had gone to Edinburgh.
Her arrest was planned, and, when the telegram arrived from London, completed.
An examination of her boxes disclosed a quantity of O'Connor's property.
Mrs. Manning was transferred to London and lodged in the Horsemonger Lane Jail, where her husband soon afterwards joined her.
He had fled to Jersey, where he was recognized and arrested.
Each tried to throw the blame on the other; Manning declared his wife had committed the murder, Mrs. Manning indignantly denied the charge.
The prisoners were in due course transferred to Newgate, to be put upon their trial at the Central Criminal Court.
A great number of distinguished people assembled as usual at the Old Bailey on the day of trial.
The Mannings were arraigned together; the husband standing at one of the front corners of the dock, his wife at the other end.
Manning, who was dressed in black, appeared to be a heavy, bull-necked, repulsive-looking man, with a very fair complexion and light hair.
The case rested upon the facts which have been already set forth, and was proved to the satisfaction of the jury, who brought in a verdict of guilty.
She complained that she had no justice; there was no law for her, she had found no protection either from judges, the prosecutor, or her husband.
On being removed to Newgate from the court Mrs. Manning became perfectly furious.
She uttered loud imprecations, cursing judge, jury, barristers, witnesses, and all who stood around.
From Newgate the Mannings were taken in separate cabs to Horsemonger Lane Jail.
Later her mood changed to abject despair.
On reaching the condemned cell she threw herself upon the floor and shrieked in an hysterical agony of tears.
Nevertheless, she attempted to commit suicide by driving her nails, purposely left long, into her throat.
She was discovered just as she was getting black in the face.
The actual execution, which took place at another prison than Newgate, is rather beyond the scope of this work.
It will be in the memory of many that Mrs. Manning appeared on the scaffold in a black satin dress, which was bound tightly round her waist.
This preference brought the costly stuff into disrepute, and its unpopularity lasted for nearly thirty years.
I will briefly describe one or two of the more remarkable murders in the years immediately following, then pass on to another branch of crime.
Robert Marley at the time of his arrest called himself a surgical instrument maker.
It was understood also that he had served in the army as a private, and had, moreover, undergone a sentence of transportation.
But it was supposed that he had been once in a good position, well born, and well educated.
When lying under sentence of death in Newgate, he was visited by a lady, a gentlewoman in every sense of the word, who was said to be his sister.
Cope, a small man, crippled, and of weakly constitution, was alone in the shop about 9:30.
Lerigo, was also attracted by the noise of the row, but after walking a few paces he felt dissatisfied, and returned to the spot.
Pushing the shop-door open, he saw Marley finishing his murderous assault.
Lerigo turned for assistance to take the man into custody.
Marley, disturbed, picked up a cigar and parcel from the counter, then ran out, pursued by Lerigo only.
Escorted by his two captors, Marley was taken back into Parliament Street to the jeweler's shop.
After sentence, the Newgate officers who had special charge of him noticed that he slept well and ate well, enjoying all his meals.
On the dread morning he came out to execution quite gaily, and tripped up the stairs to the scaffold.
His captors, it may be added (Lerigo and Allen), were warmly commended by the judge for their courage and activity.
The former was given a reward of twenty and the latter of ten pounds.
Dwyer found Cannon bleeding profusely from a wound in the head, and persuaded him to go to a doctor's.
Once more Dwyer got to his feet, and managed, by drawing his staff, to keep Cannon at bay until a second constable came to his aid.
All this time not one of a numerous body of bystanders offered to assist the policeman in his extremity.
On the contrary, many of them encouraged the brutal assailant in his savage attack.
To Cannon's infinite surprise, he was indicted for attempt to murder, and not for a simple assault, and found guilty.
The judge, in passing sentence of death, told him he richly deserved the punishment.
As Dwyer survived, Cannon escaped the death sentence, which was commuted to penal servitude for life.
A handsome sum was subscribed for the injured constable, who was disabled for life.
Only a few have vied with Cannon in fiendish cruelty and brutality.
Mobbs systematically ill-used his wife for a long space of time, and at last cut her throat.
For this he was executed in front of Newgate in 1833.
He died impenitent, declaring that he had no belief, and that it was idle to ask forgiveness of God.
I want forgiveness of man; I want those doors (of the prison) opened.
Barthelemy was generally supposed to have been a secret agent of the French police.
I will now pass to grave but less atrocious crimes.
Walter Watts was an inventor, a creator, who struck an entirely new and original line of crime.
It was the custom in this office to make the banker's passbook the basis of the entries in the company's ledgers.
This passbook, when not at the bank, was in the exclusive custody of Watts.
In this way Watts had complete control over the whole of the monetary transactions of the company.
Implicit confidence appears to have been placed in Watts, who was the son of an old and trusted employee, and, moreover, a young man of plausible address.
Watts led two lives.
In the West End he was a man of fashion, with a town house, a house at Brighton, and a cellar full of good wine at both.
He rode a priceless hack in Rotten Row, or drove down to Richmond in a mail phaeton and pair.
He played high, and spent his nights at the club, or in joyous and dissolute company.
When other pleasures palled he took a theatre, and posed as a munificent patron of the dramatic art.
The detection of these frauds came while he was still prominently before the world as the lessee of the Olympic.
Watts's crime was discovered by the secretary of the Globe Company, who came suddenly upon the extensive falsification of the passbook.
An inquiry was at once set on foot, and the frauds were traced to Watts.
There were two counts in the indictment: one for stealing a cheque value £1400, the second for stealing a bit of paper value one penny.
The sentence of the court, one of ten years' transportation, struck the prisoner with dismay.
He had been led to suppose that twelve months' imprisonment was the utmost the law could inflict, and he broke down utterly under the unexpected blow.
That same evening he committed suicide in Newgate.
The details of the suicide were given at the inquest. Watts had been in ill-health from the time of his first arrest.
His health improved, but was still indifferent when he was brought up for sentence, and he was an occupant of the Newgate infirmary.
This man got up to look for him, and found him hanging from the bars of a neighboring room.
He had made use of a piece of rope cut out from the sacking of his bedstead, and had tied his feet together with a silk pocket-handkerchief.
The prison officers were called, but Watts was quite cold and stiff when he was cut down.
Sentence of death had been recorded against Donovan, who, like Watts, had seemingly been overcome with sudden despair.
In 1853 a second case of gigantic fraud alarmed and scandalized the financial world.
It outshone the defalcations of Watts.
Nothing to equal the excitement caused by the forgeries of Robert Ferdinand Pries had been known before in the city of London.
He was a corn merchant who operated largely in grain.
So enormous were his transactions, that they often affected the markets, and caused great fluctuations in prices.
Few realized that these mysterious operations were the "convulsive attempt" of a ruined and dishonest speculator to sustain his credit.
Pries, although enjoying a high reputation in the city, had long been in a bad way.
His extensive business had been carried on by fraud.
His method was to obtain advances twice over on the same bills of lading or corn warrants. The duplicates were forged.
In this way he obtained vast sums from several firms, and one to which he was indebted upwards of £50,000 subsequently stopped payment.
Inquiries were instituted when the cheque was protested, which led to the discovery of the forgeries.
Pries was lodged in Newgate, tried at the Old Bailey, and transported for life.
Another set of frauds, which resembled those of Pries in principle, although not in practice, were soon afterwards discovered.
When such goods arrived they were frequently left at a wharf, paying rent until it suited the importer to remove them.
The dock warrant was issued by the wharfinger as certificate that he held the goods.
The warrant thus represented money, and was often used as such, being endorsed and passed from hand to hand as other negotiable bills.
Cole's plan was to have a wharf of his own, nominally occupied by a creature trading as Maltby and Co.
Maltby and Co. would issue warrants on them deliverable to the importer, and the goods were then passed to be stored in neighboring warehouses.
The owners of the latter would then issue a second set of warrants on these goods, in total ignorance of the fact that they were already pledged.
He had several narrow escapes.
Once a warrant-holder sent down a clerk to view certain goods, and the clerk found that these goods had already a "stop" upon them, or were pledged.
Again, some of the duplicate and fictitious warrants were held by a firm which suspended payment, and there was no knowing into whose hands they might fall.
They could not deny that the latter was the truth, and were forthwith stigmatized by Mr. Chapman, Overend and Gurney's representative, as rogues.
Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 18: Newgate notorieties continued, part 3.
The course of the swindlers was by no means smooth, but it was not till 1854 that suspicion arose that anything was wrong.
A firm which held a lot of warrants suddenly demanded the delivery of the goods they covered.
The goods having no existence, Cole of course could not deliver them.
This affected Cole's credit, and ugly reports were in circulation charging him with the issue of simulated warrants.
These indeed were out to the value of £367,800.
Cole's difficulties increased more and more; warrant-holders came down upon him demanding to realize their goods.
Cole now suspended payment.
Maltby, who had bolted, was pursued and arrested, to end his life miserably by committing suicide in a Newgate cell.
Cole too was apprehended, and in due course tried at the Central Criminal Court.
He was found guilty, and sentenced to the seemingly inadequate punishment of four years' transportation.
Davidson and Gordon were also sentenced to imprisonment.
The bank enjoyed an excellent reputation, it had a good connection, and was supposed to be perfectly sound.
Moreover, the partners were sober, steady men, who paid unremitting attention to business.
In December 1851 the balance sheet showed a deficiency of upwards of £70,000.
They chose, unhappily for themselves, the latter alternative.
Money they must have, and money they raised to meet their urgent necessities upon the balances and securities deposited with them by their customers.
Then it was that instead of merely pledging securities, the bank sold them outright, and thus passed the Rubicon of fraud.
Its debts amounted to three-quarters of a million, and the dividend it eventually paid was three and twopence in the pound.
But worse than the bankruptcy was the confession made by the partners in the court.
They admitted that they had made away with many of the securities entrusted to their keeping.
Bates was at once captured in Norfolk Street, Strand.
Police officers went down at night to Nutfield, near Reigate, and arrested Sir John Paul, but allowed the prisoner to sleep there.
Next morning they only just saved the train to town, and left Sir John behind on the platform, but he subsequently surrendered himself.
Mr. Strahan was arrested at a friend's house in Bryanston Square.
All three were tried at the Central Criminal Court, and sentenced to fourteen years' transportation, passing some time in Newgate en route.
Bates, the least guilty, was pardoned in 1858.
Robson was of humble origin, but he was well educated, and he had some literary abilities.
He now married, although his salary was only a pound a week; but he soon got on.
He had a pleasant address, showed good business aptitudes, and quickly acquired the approval of his superiors.
Within a year he was advanced to the post of chief clerk in the transfer department, at a salary of £150 a year.
Some time elapsed before Robson succumbed to temptation.
The temptation was all the greater because the chances of successful fraud lay ready to hand.
Shares in the company were represented by certificates, which often enough never left the company's, or more exactly Robson's, hands.
He conceived the idea of transferring shares, bogus shares from a person who held none, to any one who would buy them in the open market.
He took it for granted that the certificates representing these bogus shares, and which practically did not exist, would never be called for.
With the proceeds of these flagitious frauds Robson feasted and made merry.
All this time his position was one of extreme insecurity. He was standing over a mine which at any moment might explode.
Robson said they were at Kilburn Priory.
He came back to explain that he had mislaid them.
Mr. Fasson, more and more ill at ease, would not accept this subterfuge, and declared they must be found.
Robson again left him, but only to gather together hastily all the money and valuables on which he could lay his hands, with which he left the house.
Mr. Fasson waited and waited for his subordinate to re-appear, and at last discovered his flight.
A reward was forthwith offered for Robson's apprehension.
Thence he was transferred to Copenhagen and surrendered in due course to a London police officer.
Little more remains to be said about Robson. He appears to have accepted his position, and to have at once resigned himself to his fate.
When brought to trial he took matters very coolly, and at first pleaded "Not Guilty," but subsequently withdrew the plea.
Robson was found guilty, and sentenced to two terms of transportation, one for twenty and one for fourteen years.
Redpath's crime arose from his peculiar and independent position as registrar of stock of the Great Northern Railway Company.
This offered him great facilities for the creation of artificial stock, its sale from a fictitious holder, and transfer to himself.
By these means Redpath misappropriated vast sums during a period extending over ten years.
The total amount was never exactly made out, but the false stock created and issued by him was estimated at two hundred twenty thousand pounds.
He began in a very small way.
He soon proved his ability, and by unremitting attention mastered the whole work of the office.
Now he launched out into great expenditure, took a house in Chester Terrace, and became known as a Maecenas and patron of the arts.
He had a nice taste in bric-à-brac, and was considered a good judge of pictures.
Leading social and artistic personages were to be met with at his house, and his hospitality was far famed.
But his chief extravagance, his favorite folly, was the exercise of an ostentatious benevolence.
The philanthropy he had displayed in a small way when less prosperous became now a passion.
His name headed every subscription list; his purse was always open.
Not content with giving where assistance was solicited, he himself sought out deserving cases and personally afforded relief.
Down at Weybridge, where he had a country place, his name was long remembered with gratitude by the poor.
Redpath passed and lifted his hat to his chairman; the latter acknowledged the salute.
But the peer rushed forward and shook Redpath warmly by the hand.
It was at once decided at the board to make a thorough examination of all his books.
The inquiry soon revealed the colossal character of the frauds.
Warrants were issued for Redpath's arrest, but he had flown to Paris.
Thither police officers followed, only to find that he had returned to London.
A further search discovered him at breakfast at a small house in the New Road.
He was arrested, examined before a police magistrate, and committed to Newgate.
Great excitement prevailed in the city and the West End when Redpath's defalcations were made public.
The Stock Market was greatly affected, and society, more especially that which frequents Exeter Hall, was convulsed.
In Newgate Redpath is remembered by the prison officer as a difficult man to deal with.
From the moment of his reception he gave himself great airs, as a martyr and a man heavily wronged.
It has been already remarked in these pages that with changed social conditions came a great change in the character of crimes.
It was no longer possible to stop a coach or carriage, or rob the postman who carried the mail.
There were still big prizes, however, to tempt the daring, and none appealed more to the thievish instinct than the custom of transmitting gold by rail.
He laid the suggestion before Agar, a professional thief, who was of opinion it contained elements of success.
Burgess detailed the whole system of transmission.
The gold, packed in an iron-bound box, was securely lodged in safes locked with patent Chubbs.
Each safe had three sets of double keys, all held by confidential servants of the company.
At the other side of the Channel the French railway authorities took charge.
The safes while on the line en route between London and Folkestone were in the guard's van.
This was an important step, and they might easily be robbed some day when Burgess was the guard, provided only that they could be opened.
The next step was to get impressions and fabricate false keys.
A new accomplice was now needed within the company's establishment, and Pierce looked about long before he found the right person.
At last he decided to enlist one Tester, a clerk in the traffic department, whom he thought would prove a likely tool.
This was at length effected by Agar and Pierce.
After hanging about the Folkestone office for some time, they saw at last that the key was kept in a certain cupboard.
Still watching and waiting for the first chance, they seized it when the clerks left the office empty for a moment.
After this nothing remained but to wait for some occasion when the amount transmitted would be sufficient to justify the risks of robbery.
It was Tester's business, who had access to the railway company's books, to watch for this.
Meanwhile the others completed their preparations with the utmost care.
A weight of shot was bought and stowed in carpet bags ready to replace exactly the abstracted gold.
Burgess admitted him into the guard's van, where he fitted and filed the keys till they worked easily and satisfactorily in the locks of the safe.
One night Tester whispered to Agar and Pierce, "All right," as they cautiously lounged about London Bridge.
The thieves took first-class tickets, handed their bags full of shot to the porters, who placed them in the guard's van.
Just as the train was starting Agar slipped into the van with Burgess, and Pierce got into a first-class carriage.
Agar at once got to work on the first safe.
At Redhill Tester met the train and relieved the thieves of a portion of the stolen gold.
At the same station Pierce joined Agar in the guard's van, and there were now three to carry on the robbery.
The two remaining safes were attacked and nearly entirely despoiled in the same way as the first, and the contents transferred to the courier bags.
The train was now approaching Folkestone, and Agar and Pierce hid themselves in a dark part of the van.
The latter was ere long arrested on a charge of uttering forged cheques, convicted, and sentenced to transportation for life.
Pierce made Kay only a few small payments, then appropriated the rest of the money.
Agar too, in Newgate, heard how Pierce had treated him, and at once readily turned approver.
As the evidence he gave incriminated Pierce, Burgess, and Tester, all three were arrested and committed to Newgate for trial.
Scarcely had the conviction of these daring and astute thieves been assured, than another gigantic fraud was brought to light.
A man of birth and education, a member of the bar, and of acknowledged legal attainments, his proclivities were all downward.
Instead of following an honorable profession, he preferred to turn his great natural talents and ready wits to the most nefarious practices.
But Saward's operations were mainly directed to the fabrication and uttering of forged cheques.
His method was comprehensive and deeply laid.
Burglars brought him the cheques they stole from houses, thieves what they got in pocketbooks.
Cheques blank and canceled were his stock-in-trade. The former he filled up by exact imitation of the latter, signature and all.
Saward's method of negotiating the cheques was equally well planned.
Like his great predecessor Old Patch, he never went to a bank himself, nor did any of his accomplices.
The bearer of the cheque was always innocent and ignorant of the fraudulent nature of the document he presented.
Saward's letter to Hardwicke fell into the hands of the police and compromised him.
He then confessed that he was the redoubtable Jem Saward, or Jem the Penman, and was conveyed to a police-court, and thence to Newgate.
The proceeds of these forgeries amounted, it was said, to some thousands per annum.
Saward spent all his share at low gaming houses, and in all manner of debaucheries.
He was in person a short, square-built man of gentlemanly address, sharp and shrewd in conversation and manner.
Yet the jail, in spite of its fortress-like aspect, was by no means really safe.
Year after year prisoners determined to get free, and occasionally succeeded in their efforts.
The inspectors' reports mention many cases of evasion accomplished.
There were others less successful.
Charles Thomas White, awaiting execution for arson, made a desperate effort to escape from Newgate in 1827.
It was noticed that he was most anxious to receive a pair of shoes for which he had asked, and when they arrived they were closely examined.
Sewn in between the upper and lower leathers several spring saws were found, which would have easily cut through any bars.
There is an attempt at escape mentioned in Mr. Wakefield's book, which might have been an intended suicide.
John Williams, a young fellow only twenty-three years of age, awaited execution in 1827 for stealing in a dwelling-house.
He never reached the cistern, but fell back into the yard, injuring his legs severely.
Although his execution was imminent, a surgeon attended to his wounds, and he was carried more dead than alive to the scaffold.
Yet from the circumstantial account given by Williams after recapture, there can be little doubt that he got away as will be described.
Williams as a capital convict was lodged in the press-yard or condemned ward.
He had access to the airing yard, and there was for hours no kind of supervision.
Williams surveyed these formidable obstacles to evasion, and calmly proceeded to surmount them.
The condition of the stone surface just mentioned assisted him in this, and he managed to get beyond the cistern to the railing below the chevaux-de-frise.
He had here completed his ascent.
His next job was to descend outside Newgate.
If the worst came to the worst, he intended to have gone down some chimney, as he had often done before in the way of business.
But he did not like the risk of entering a room by the fireplace, and the chances of detection it offered.
Here he came upon a woman on the leads hanging out clothes to dry.
She suffered him to pass downstairs.
To walk out into the street was an easy affair, and he was now free, with one and fourpence in his pocket and a shirt and trousers for all his clothing.
Mr. Cope, the governor of Newgate, having been communicated with, proceeded to Winchester, where he at once identified Williams.
The success, although very short-lived, which attended him, no doubt inspired other inmates of Newgate to follow his example.
It was for some time after this a constant practice to go up the chimneys in the hopes of escaping by the flue.
Even then, however, irons across barred the ascent after a certain distance, and in no one case did a fugitive get clear away.
On another occasion Mr. Cope the governor came in and missed a man.
He was engaged in whitewashing and cleaning; the officer who had him in charge left him on the stairs leading to the gallery.
Taking advantage of being unobserved, he got out through the roof on to the leads, and traveled along them towards No. 1, Newgate Street.
This was a public-house.
He stepped in at a garret window, coolly walked downstairs, and entered the bar.
They asked him how he had cut his hand, which was bleeding, and he said he had done it while working up on the roof.
No further notice was taken of him; no one seemingly suspected that he was a prisoner, and he was suffered to walk off without let or hindrance.
In 1853 three men escaped in company from one of the wards in the middle yard.
These men managed to cut a hole in the ceiling of the ward near the iron cage on the landing, and so got access to the roof.
At that time rope mats were still used as beds.
One of the three, shamming ill, remained all day in his ward, where he employed himself unraveling the rope from the sleeping-mats.
Brown almost at once; then Barry, who was taken at the East End in a public-house where he had arranged to meet a pal.
The third, Bell, remained longest at large. He too was run into at a lodging in the Kingsland Road.
The officers dropped on to him while he was still in bed, but as they came upstairs he jumped up and hid in a cupboard.
A later case was still more remarkable, as it was effected after the alteration of the prison and its reconstruction on the newest lines.
A sailor, Krapps by name, occupied one of the upper cells in the new block.
The doors, through incomplete knowledge of prison needs, were not, as now, sheeted with iron.
The prisoner had nothing to deal with but wooden panels, and by dint of cutting and chopping he got both the lower panels out.
Through the aperture he crept out on to the landing at the dead of night, and so down into the central space of the building.
Under superior orders all the doors and gates of this block were left open at night, to allow the night watchman to pass freely to all parts.
This was considered safer than intrusting him with keys.
Krapps walked at once into the yard and across to the female side, where he found some of the washing still hanging out to dry.
The top of the wall was gained without difficulty.
Along this Krapps crawled, and then dropped down on to the cook-house.
He now put in requisition the rope made of the sheets, and with its help lowered himself into the street.
Down below were market-carts waiting for daylight, and among them Krapps found a refuge and friends.
The first intimation of his escape was afforded by the police, who informed the prison authorities next day that a rope was hanging down from the cook-house roof.
There is, however, no explanation of the motives which prompt prisoners to attempt escapes.
The last escape from Newgate was only three years ago, and occurred just before the final closing of the prison.
No report of it was made public, as the man was almost immediately recaptured.
He was out of sight while so employed, and remained so long absent that the warder, becoming uneasy, went in search of him.
He had disappeared.
Then he ran along the coping of the wall towards its angle with Tyler's manufactory, and dropped down on to the gridiron below.
This was not strong enough to carry him, and he fell through.
Suicides and executions were, however, always the most effectual methods of making exit from durance.
One curious instance of a suicide carried out under the most adverse and extraordinary circumstances may be quoted.
The noose was one of his hammock straps, which he buckled round his throat.
He might have saved himself at any moment by merely extending an arm; but he lay there patiently till death supervened.
Probably dissolution came as easily and almost without pain.
A laudable desire to invest executions with more and more solemnity and decorum gained ground as they became more rare.
I may be permitted to digress for a moment to give a few particulars concerning the last officially appointed hangman of the city of London.
After Calcraft's resignation no successor was really appointed.
But Calcraft regularly succeeded Foxen, who followed Botting, and Dennis, the actor in the 1780 riots.
The other accepted, and they got into conversation.
Foxen asked him his name and address, and went away.
He accepted, having at first Tom Cheshire as his assistant, then for a time, when Cheshire was dismissed for drunkenness, a man named Osborne.
After that he worked alone.
I cannot find that Calcraft was sworn in when appointed, or any exact information when the old forbidding ceremony ceased to be practiced.
Calcraft's emoluments were a guinea per week, and an extra guinea for every execution.
He got besides half-a-crown for every man he flogged, and an allowance to provide cats or birch rods.
It was not always easy to get a hangman so cheap, as I have already indicated on a previous page.
The onus and responsibility of carrying out the sentence is personal to the sheriff. A good story is told illustrating this.
Some wags in Scotland seized Calcraft and kept him in durance the night before the execution.
Meanwhile the convener or sheriff was in despair, expecting that, failing the executioner, he would have to do the job himself.
But, fortunately for him, just at the last moment Calcraft was set free.
The mark was valued at thirteenpence halfpenny, or rather more than the shilling, which from time immemorial had been the hangman's wages.
That very ancient perquisite the convict's clothes was never claimed by Calcraft, and it may be doubted whether he was entitled to it.
He expressly bequeathed them to Calcraft, who was graciously pleased to accept them.
On another occasion an importunate person begged Calcraft eagerly to claim his right to the clothes, and give them to him.
Calcraft consented, got and bestowed the clothes, only to find that the person he had obliged exhibited them publicly.
It may be added that of late years the clothes in which a convict has suffered are invariably burnt.
Capital convicts go to the gallows in their own clothing, and not in prison dress, unless the former is quite unfit to be worn.
They did not dislike Calcraft, however, at Newgate. He was an illiterate, simple-minded man, who scarcely remembered what executions he had performed.
He kept no record of them, and when asked questions, referred to the officers of the jail.
His nature must have been kindly.
He was so much in favor of short drops that his immediate successor, Marwood, stigmatized him as "short-drop" man.
Marwood being, on the other hand, in favor of giving a man as much rope as possible.
Marwood till latterly seemed to have done his work more effectually, and has been known to give as much as six feet fall.
This generally produces instantaneous death, although cases where complete fracture of the spinal cord occurred are said to be rare.
Calcraft served the city of London till 1874, when he was pensioned at the rate of twenty-five shillings per week.
The last execution at which he acted was that of Godwin, on the 25th May, 1874.
Until the time of his death he kept a small shop close to the church in Horncastle.
The strange competition amongst hundreds to succeed Marwood is a strange fact too recently before the public to need mention here.
Executions long continued to be in public, in spite of remonstrance and reprobation.
The old prejudices, such as that which enlisted Dr. Johnson on the side of the Tyburn procession, still lingered and prevented any change.
This line of argument prevailed over the manifest horrors of the spectacle. These increased as time passed.
It was a callous, careless crowd of coarse-minded, semi-brutalized folk, who came to enjoy themselves.
Few, if any, showed any feeling of terror, none were impressed with the solemnity, or realized the warning which the sight conveyed.
No notion that they were assisting at a vindication of the law filled the minds of those present with dread.
On the contrary, the prevailing sentiment was one of satisfaction at the success of the spectacle.
The remarks heard amongst the crowd were of coarse approval.
The reply evinced equal satisfaction, and the speaker, with a profane oath, declared that he would like to act as Jack Ketch to the whole lot.
To the disgrace of the better-educated and better-bred public, executions could still command the attendance of curious aristocrats from the West End.
As much as £25 was paid for a first-floor front on this occasion.
Never, indeed, had an execution been more generally patronized.
They collected over night in the bright light of a November moon.
Rain fell heavily at intervals, but did not thin the concourse.
There were preachers among the crowd, but they could not get a patient hearing.
Oh, my! Think I've got to die.
As day broke the character of the crowd was betrayed.
The actual execution made some impression.
He, after failing once to cut the rope, made a second attempt more successfully, and the body of Müller disappeared from view.
It was preposterous to claim for such a scene as this that it conveyed any great moral lesson, or had any deterring influence.
Numbers of humane and thoughtful persons had long been convinced of this.
Some of the judges would have retained the public spectacle; the ordinary of Newgate was not certain that public executions were not the best.
Foreign witnesses, too, were in favor of publicity.
On the other hand, Lords Cranworth and Wensleydale recommended private executions; so did Mr. Spencer Walpole, M.P.
Sir George Grey thought there was a growing feeling in favor of executions within the prison precincts.
Other officials, great lawyers, governors of prisons, and chaplains supported this view.
The only doubts expressed were as to the sufficiency of the safeguards, as to the certainty of death and its subsequent publication.
But these, it was thought, might be provided by the admission of the press and the holding of a coroner's inquest.
But it is curious to note that there were several dissentients among the commissioners to this paragraph of the report.
It was read for the first time in March 1866, but did not become law till 1868.
Unusual precautions were taken upon this occasion, as some fresh outrage was apprehended.
There was no interference with the crowd, which collected as usual, although not to the customary extent.
But Newgate and its neighborhood was carefully held by the police, both city and metropolitan.
The sufferer was stolid and reticent to the last.
The first private execution under the new law took place within the precincts of Maidstone Jail.
The sufferer was a porter on the London, Chatham, and Dover railway, sentenced to death for shooting the station-master at Dover.
The ceremony, which was witnessed by only a few officials and representatives of the press, was performed with the utmost decency and decorum.
Private executions at their first introduction were not popular with the Newgate officials, and for intelligible reasons.
Under the new system the whole of the arrangements from first to last fell upon the officers.
All that the hangman, whoever he may be, does under the new regime is to unhook the halter and remove the pinioning straps.
The interment in a shell filled with quicklime in the passage-way leading to the Old Bailey is also a part of the duty of the prison officials.
Underfoot and upon the walls roughly cut into the stones, are single initial letters, the brief epitaphs of those who lie below.
All too have a fairly good appetite, and eat with relish, up to the last moment.
A few go further, and are almost gluttonous.
He ate constantly and voraciously after sentence, as though eager to cram as many meals as possible into the few hours still left him to live.
The request was not granted, as the old custom of allowing capital convicts whatever they asked for in the way of food has not been the rule in Newgate.
The craving for tobacco which so dominates the habitual smoker often leads the convicted to plead hard for a last smoke.
Wainwright was allowed a cigar the night before execution, which he smoked in the prison yard, walking up and down with the governor, Mr. Sydney Smith.
Wainwright's demeanor was one of reckless effrontery steadily maintained to the last.
His conversation turned always upon his influence over the weaker sex, and the extraordinary success he had achieved.
No woman could resist him, he calmly assured Mr. Smith that night as they walked together, and he recounted his villanies one by one.
His effrontery was only outdone by his cool contempt for the consolations of religion.
During the singing of these hymns Wainwright fainted, but whether from real emotion or the desire to make a sensation was never exactly known.
There was a smile on his face when it was last seen, and just as the terrible white cap was drawn over it.
Wainwright's execution was within the jail, but only nominally private.
No less than sixty-seven persons were present, admitted by special permission of the sheriff.
Many, like Wainwright, were calm and imperturbable throughout their trying ordeal.
The man Marley displayed fortitude of a less repulsive kind. He acknowledged his guilt from the first.
During the trial and after sentence he remained perfectly cool and collected.
He tripped up the chapel-stairs to hear the condemned sermon, and came out with cheerful alacrity on the morning he was to die.
Some condemned convicts converse but little with the warders who have them unceasingly in charge.
Others talk freely enough on various topics, but principally upon their own cases.
When vanity is strongly developed there is the keen anxiety to hear what is being said about them outside.
One was vexed to think that his victims had a finer funeral than he would have.
Often the convicts give way to despair. They are too closely watched to be allowed to do themselves much mischief, or suicides would probably be more frequent.
But it is neither easy to obtain the instruments of self-destruction nor to elude the vigilance of their guard.
He was promptly rescued from his perilous condition, but not before his face and hands were badly scorched.
They were still much swollen when he was led out to execution.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 20: Newgate Notorieties, part 1.
As these records draw to a close, the crimes I chronicle become so much more recent in date that they will be fresh in the memory of most of my readers.
The crime of poisoning has always been viewed with peculiar loathing and terror in this country.
But secret poisoning on a wholesale scale such as was practiced in Italy and France was happily never popularized in England.
The cases of poisoning in the British calendars are rare, nor indeed was the guilt of the accused always clearly established.
Palmer's trial caused the most intense excitement.
The Central Criminal Court was crowded to suffocation.
His features were not careworn, but rather set, and he looked older than his age.
Throughout his trial he preserved an impassive countenance, but he clearly took a deep interest in all that passed.
Although the strain lasted fourteen days, he showed no signs of exhaustion, either physical or mental.
On returning to jail each day he talked freely and without reserve to the warders in charge of him, chiefly on incidents in the day's proceedings.
In the condemned cell he frequently repeated, quote, I go to my death a murdered man, end quote.
I ought also to confess the others: I mean my wife and my brother's. End quote.
Yet he was silent when specifically pressed to confess that he had killed his wife and his brother.
There is every reason to suppose that he poisoned his wife to obtain possession of this sum upon her death.
His brother was supposed to have been his next victim, upon whose life he had also effected an insurance for another £13,000.
The brother too died conveniently, but the life office took some exception to the manner of the death, and hesitated to disburse the funds claimed by Palmer.
Palmer tried to get a new insurance on the life of a hanger-on, one Bates, but no office would accept it, no doubt greatly to Bates's longevity.
Meanwhile the bill discounters who held the forged acceptances, with other promissory notes, began to clamor for payment, and talk of issuing writs.
It was there that Cook was first taken ill with violent retchings and vomitings, all dating from visits of Palmer, who brought him medicines and food.
Palmer's plan was to administer poison in quantities insufficient to cause death, but enough to produce illness which would account for death.
Quantities of antimony were found in the body after death.
The last act now approached, and in order to avoid the detection of this last fraud, Palmer laid his plans for disposing of Cook.
The purchase by Palmer of strychnia was proved.
The night he bought it, Cook, who had been taking certain pills under medical advice, not Palmer's, was seized with violent convulsions.
Cook recovered this time; it was probably Palmer's intention that he should recover, wishing to encourage the supposition that Cook was in a bad way.
Next night Cook had a second and a more violent attack.
That day Palmer had bought more strychnia, and had called in a fresh doctor.
The second attack was fatal, and ended in Cook's death from tetanus.
After Cook's death his stepfather, who was much attached to him, came to Rugeley.
Palmer too showed an indecent haste in preparing the body for interment, and in obtaining the usual certificate.
After this the step-father insisted upon a post-mortem, which was conducted somewhat carelessly.
All the circumstances were so suspicious that he could not escape the criminal charge.
He had already been arrested on a writ issued at the instance of the money-lenders, and an action had been commenced against Mrs. Palmer on her acceptances.
It came out at once that these had been forged, and the whole affair at once took the ugliest complexion.
A government prosecution was instituted, and Palmer was brought to Newgate for trial at the Central Criminal Court.
There was not much reserve about him when there.
He frequently declared before and during the trial that it would be impossible to find him guilty.
He never actually said that he was not guilty, but he was confident he would not be convicted.
He relied on the absence of the strychnia.
But the chain of circumstantial evidence was strong enough to satisfy the jury, who agreed to their verdict in an hour.
At the last moment Palmer tossed a bit of paper over to his counsel, on which he had written, quote, I think there will be a verdict of Not Guilty, end quote.
Even after the death sentence had been passed upon him he clung to the hope that the Government would grant him a reprieve.
He suffered at Stafford in front of the jail.
Palmer speedily found imitators.
Within a few weeks occurred the Leeds poisoning case, in which the murderer undoubtedly was inspired by the facts made public at Palmer's trial.
In the latter hope he was happily disappointed. But as this case is beyond my subject, I merely mention it as one of the group already referred to.
There was no convincing proof that the accused had administered the poison, although beyond question that poison had occasioned the death.
Dr. Smethurst was long an inmate of Newgate, and was tried at the Central Criminal Court.
Smethurst's victim was a Miss Bankes, with whom he had contracted a bigamous marriage.
For some months Smethurst and Miss Bankes lived together as man and wife, first in London, and then at Richmond.
But probably the lump sum was the bait, or perhaps Smethurst wished to return to his temporarily deserted first wife.
Smethurst was found guilty by the jury, and sentenced to death.
But a long public discussion followed, and in consequence he was reprieved.
Catherine Wilson was a female poisoner who did business wholesale.
She was tried in April 1862 on suspicion of having attempted to poison a neighbor with oil of vitriol.
Wilson was acquitted on this charge, but other suspicious facts cropped up while she was in Newgate.
It appeared that several persons with whom she was intimate had succumbed suddenly.
Soon afterwards Dixon died, showing all the symptoms already described.
Soon afterwards a friend, Mrs. Atkinson, came to London from Westmoreland, and stayed in Mrs. Wilson's house.
She was in good health on leaving home, and had with her a large sum of money.
While with Mrs. Wilson she became suddenly and alarmingly ill, and died in great agony.
Her husband, who came up to town, would not allow a post-mortem, and again Mrs. Wilson escaped.
After this came the charge of administering oil of vitriol, which failed, as has been described.
Last of all Mrs. Wilson poisoned her landlady, Mrs. Soames, under precisely the same conditions as the foregoing.
Here, however, the evidence was strong and sufficient.
The last time Mrs. Soames showed great reluctance to take it, but Wilson said it would certainly do her good.
Wilson was duly sentenced to death, and suffered impenitent, hardened, and without any confession of her guilt.
Navigation and discipline could not be easy with such a nondescript crew.
The mutiny was organized with great secrecy, and broke out most unexpectedly in the middle of the night.
A simultaneous attack was made upon the captain and the first mate.
The latter had the watch on deck.
One half of the mutineers fell upon him unawares with handspikes and capstan-bars.
His body was found lying in a pool of blood in a night-dress, stabbed over and over again in the left side.
The captain's brother, a passenger on board the 'Flowery Land,' was also stabbed to death and his body thrown overboard.
He was soon summoned on deck, but as he would not move, the mutineers came down and stood in a circle round his berth.
The murders were perpetrated on the 10th September, and the ship continued her voyage for nearly three weeks, meeting and speaking one ship only.
The place at which they landed was not far from the entrance to the River Plate.
A farmer took them in for the night, and drove them next day to Rocha, a place north of Maldonado.
Their trial followed at the Central Criminal Court.
Vartos the Turk, and Carlos the Greek.
Seven were found guilty of murder on the high seas, and one, Carlos, acquitted.
They were an abject, miserable crew, cowards at heart; but some, especially Lopez, continued bloodthirsty to the last.
Lopez took a violent dislike to the officer of the ward in charge of them, and often expressed a keen desire to do for him.
They none of them spoke much English except Leon, commonly called Lyons.
On the morning of execution the noise of fixing the gallows in the street outside awoke one or two of them.
Lyons asked the time, and was told it was only five.
Lopez was more talkative.
When the warder went in to call him he asked for his clothes. He was told he would have to wear his own.
Then he wanted to know when the policemen would arrive, and was told none would come.
No soldiers either.
The convicts were pinioned one by one and sent singly out to the gallows.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 21: Newgate Notorieties, part 2.
In July 1864 occurred the murder of Mr. Briggs, a gentleman advanced in years and chief clerk in Robarts' bank.
He lived at Hackney, but he never reached it alive.
When the train arrived at Hackney station, a passenger who was about to enter one of the carriages found the cushions soaked with blood.
Inside the carriage was a hat, a walking-stick, and a small black leather bag.
About the same time a body was discovered on the line near the railway-bridge by Victoria Park.
It was that of an aged man, whose head had been battered in by a life-preserver.
There was a deep wound just over the ear, the skull was fractured, and there were several other blows and wounds on the head.
Strange to say, the unfortunate man was not yet dead, and he actually survived more than four-and-twenty hours.
T. Briggs, Esq., Robarts & Co., Lombard Street.
The stick and bag were his, but not the hat.
A desperate and deadly struggle must have taken place in the carriage, and the stain of a bloody hand marked the door.
The facts of the murder and its object, robbery, were thus conclusively proved.
Mr. Death, who had given another in exchange for it to a man supposed to be a foreigner.
A photograph of Müller shown the jeweler was identified as the likeness of the man who had exchanged Mr. Briggs' chain.
Last of all, the cabman swore that he had bought the very hat found in the carriage for Müller at the hatter's, Walker's of Crawford Street.
This fixed the crime pretty certainly upon Müller, who had already left the country, thus increasing suspicion under which he lay.
There was no mystery about his departure; he had gone to Canada, by the 'Victoria' sailing ship, starting from the London docks, and bound to New York.
This was the 'City of Manchester,' which was expected to arrive some days before the 'Victoria,' and did so.
The officers went on board the 'Victoria' at once, Müller was identified by Mr. Death, and the arrest was made.
The prisoner was forthwith extradited and sent back to England, which he reached with his escort on the 17th September the same year.
His trial followed at the next sessions of the Central Criminal Court, and ended in his conviction.
It was really evidence of facts which could not be controverted or explained away.
There was the prisoner's poverty, his inability to account for himself on the night of the murder, and his possession of the property of the murdered man.
An alibi was set up for the defense, but not well substantiated, and the jury without hesitation returned a verdict of guilty.
Müller protested after sentence of death had been passed upon him that he had been convicted on a false statement of facts.
Müller knew that any confession would ruin his chances of escape.
While in the condemned cell he conversed freely with the warders in broken English or through an interpreter.
He was short in stature, his legs were light for the upper part of his body, which was powerful, almost herculean.
It is generally supposed that he committed the murder under a sudden access of covetousness and greed.
He saw Mr. Briggs' watch-chain, and followed him instantly into the carriage, determined to have it at all costs.
His crime under this aspect of it was less premeditated, and less atrocious therefore, than that of Lefroy.
One other curious murder may be added to the two foregoing.
Christian Sattler was by birth a German.
At the disbandment of the force, as he was without resources, he turned his attention to hotel robberies, by which he lived for some years.
He at length stole a carpet-bag containing valuables, and fled to Hamburgh.
The inspector said that they could not be removed till he reached England.
This reply of his contained no promise of immediate release.
As Sattler brooded over his wrongs, his rage got the upper hand, and he resolved to wreak it upon Thain.
Although manacled, he managed to get a pistol from his chest and load it.
The next time Thain entered his cabin he fired at him point-blank, and lodged three bullets in his breast.
The unfortunate man survived till he landed, but died in Guy's Hospital.
Sattler was a very excitable although not an ill-tempered man.
While in Newgate awaiting trial he frequently tried to justify his murder by declaring that the police officer had broken faith with him.
He would shoot any man or any policeman like a dog, or any number of them, who had treated him in that way.
His demeanor immediately preceding his execution I have referred to in the last chapter.
Several cases of gigantic fraud, rivaling any already recorded, were brought to light between 1856 and 1873.
I propose next to describe the leading features of the most important of these.
Another case of long-continued successful forgery was brought to light two years after the convictions of Saward and his accomplices.
As a blind for their new frauds, they set up as law-stationers in York Buildings, Adelphi, and at once commenced their nefarious traffic.
Forged cheques and bills were soon uttered in great numbers, as well as base coin.
Chandler while in Newgate turned informer, and betrayed the whole conspiracy.
He, like Saward, was an artist in penmanship.
His copies were generally pronounced indistinguishable from and as good as the originals.
The aged but wary Kerp, the moment the plot was discovered, vanished, and was never more heard of.
Much the same plan was adopted by these forgers as by Saward to get their cheques cashed.
They advertised for clerks, and employed the most likely of the applicants by sending them to the bank.
It was one of these, Glendinning, who had allowed himself to be utilized for some time in this way, whose capture led to the breaking up of the gang.
His offer was not, however, accepted.
Burnett had only just come out of jail after completing a sentence of penal servitude.
All that was taken was handed over to Burnett, or a "woman in black" whom Brown met by appointment at Waterloo station.
One more remains, that of "glazing," without which no paper is issued for engraving.
None of the stolen paper was glazed, and this was an important clue to the subsequent discovery of the crime.
Some time in 1862, a large deficiency in stock of bank paper unglazed was discovered at the mills.
Soon afterwards the inspectors of bank-notes at the Bank of England detected the presentation at the bank of spurious notes on genuine paper.
The amount of Brewer's abstractions (who was eventually acquitted) was never exactly estimated.
The next step was to take the principals, and under such circumstances as would insure their conviction.
A watch was set on Burnett, who was followed to the shop of one Buncher, a butcher in Strutton Ground.
The police officers now taxed Mrs. Campbell with complicity, and frightened her into collusion.
He came to complete a sale of forged notes, and he wanted a couple of hundred pounds for what he had.
I am the man that has got all the bank paper; I have £30,000 now, and the Bank of England cannot stop it.
This was all the police wanted to know.
They next watched Buncher, and found that he paid frequent visits to Birmingham.
Buncher in London, and Griffiths in Birmingham.
In one corner was a printing-press actually in use, and on it were twenty-one forged Bank of England notes, without date or signature.
On the bed were twenty forged ten-pound notes complete and ready for use, and twenty-five five-pound notes.
More than this, Griffiths took the police to a field where, in a bank, a number of other plates were secreted.
This was penal servitude for life, Buncher's sentence being twenty-five, and Burnett's twenty years.
Cummings, who had introduced Buncher to Griffiths, was also tried for being in possession of stolen bank paper for improper purposes.
On his return to Newgate to be finally discharged, Cummings jumped up the stairs and fairly danced for joy.
One narrow escape he had, however, before he abandoned his old business.
A Bow Street officer saw him leaving London in the evening by Camberwell Green, accompanied by two other men.
It was well known that they were resurrectionists, and a strict watch was kept at all the turnpike gates on the southern roads leading into London.
An officer was placed for this purpose at New Cross, Camberwell, and Kennington gates.
Presently "Old Bob" drove up to Camberwell Gate in the same cart in which he had been seen to start.
The officers rushed out to detain him. "What have you got here? We must search the cart," they cry.
Bob was therefore allowed to pass on.
But they had the body, all the same; it had been dressed up in decent clothes and made to stand upright in the cart.
With the police officers it had passed muster as a living member of the party.
Cummings was repeatedly "run in" for the offense of coining and uttering bad money, whether coin or notes.
His regular trade, followed before he took to the life of resurrectionist, was that of an engraver.
But the police nearly paid the penalty of capture with their lives.
Proceeding cautiously down the stairs, they found that the flooring at the bottom had been taken up.
Where it had lain was a yawning gulf or trap sufficient to do for the whole body of police engaged in the capture.
Cummings was caught shortly afterwards.
He was a tall, slender man, with a long face and iron-gray hair.
It was not easy to detect coiners, or bring home their guilt to them.
Those who manufactured and those who passed had no direct dealings with each other.
The false coin was bought by an agent from an agent, and dealings were carried on secretly at the "Clock House" in Seven Dials.
As the case must still be well remembered by the present generation, it will be necessary to give here only the briefest summary.
William Roupell was the eldest but illegitimate son of a wealthy man who subsequently married Roupell's mother, and had further legitimate issue.
William was brought up as an attorney, and became in due course his father's man of business.
As such he had pretty general control over his father's estates and affairs.
In 1856 the father died.
This will was a deliberate forgery.
Five or six years later, William Roupell minutely described how he had effected the fraud.
The day his father died he got the keys of his private bureau, opened it, and took out the authentic will.
He himself prepared it on a blank form which he had brought with him on purpose.
To this fraudulent instrument he appended forged signatures, and in due course obtained probate.
As he possessed nearly unbounded influence over his mother, her accession to the property meant that William could dispose of it as he pleased.
He embarked forthwith in a career of the wildest extravagance, and ere long he had parted in his mother's name with most of the landed estates.
One large item of his expenditure was a contested election at Lambeth, which he gained at a cost of £10,000.
William Roupell himself was brought as a principal witness to clench the case by a confession altogether against himself.
He told his story with perfect coolness and self-possession, but in a grave and serious tone.
For these crimes William Roupell was tried at the Central Criminal Court on the 24th September, 1862.
He declined to plead, but a plea of "Not Guilty" was recorded.
The case was easily and rapidly disposed of.
Roupell made a long statement more in exculpation than in his defense.
He complained that he had at first been the dupe of others, and admitted that he had too readily fallen astray.
Roupell was quiet and submissive while in Newgate, unassuming in manner, and ready to make the best of his position.
His uniform good conduct gained him release from Portland on ticket-of-leave in 1882, just twenty years after his conviction.
Mrs. Tarpey was almost immediately captured and put on her trial, but she was acquitted on the plea that she had acted under the coercion of her husband.
On Tarpey's defense it was stated that the idea of the theft had been suggested to him by a novel, at a time he had lost largely on the turf.
The first plot was against Mr. Harry Emmanuel, but he escaped, and the attempt was made upon Loudon and Ryder.
The last great case of fraud upon the Bank of England will fitly close this branch of the criminal records of Newgate.
The commercial experience of these clever rogues was cosmopolitan.
Their operations were no less worldwide.
Dresden, Bordeaux, Marseilles, and Lyons.
After this the other conspirators traveled to obtain genuine bills and master the system of the leading houses at home and abroad.
The fraud was rendered possible by the absence of a check usual in the United States.
There such bills would be sent to the drawer to be initialed, and the forgery would have been at once detected.
It was the discovery of this flaw in the banking system which had encouraged the Americans to attempt this crime.
Time was clearly an important factor in the fraud, hence the bills were sent forward in quick succession.
Long before they came to maturity the forgers hoped to be well beyond arrest. They had, moreover, sought to destroy all clue.
They had omitted to insert the dates in certain bills.
The bills were sent as a matter of form to the drawer to have the date added, and the forgery was at once detected.
Noyes was seized without difficulty, as it was a part of the scheme that he should act as the dupe, and remain on the spot in London till all the money was obtained.
Through Noyes the rest of the conspirators were eventually apprehended. Very little if any of the ill-gotten proceeds, however, was ever recovered.
The vigilance of the Newgate officials, assisted by the city police, completely frustrated this plot.
An increase of policemen on duty sufficed to prevent any attempt of this kind.
Nor were these two abortive efforts all that were planned.
But extra precautions and close supervision have so far proved effectual, and the prisoners are still in custody after a lapse of ten years.
I propose to end at this point the detailed account of the more prominent criminal cases which lodged their perpetrators in Newgate.
The most recent affairs are still too fresh in the public mind to need more than a passing reference.
Greed in another form led the Stauntons to make away with Mrs. Patrick Staunton, murdering her with devilish cruelty by slow degrees.
But it was scarcely worse than that of Mrs. Brownrigg, or that of the Meteyards, both of whom did their helpless apprentices to death.
It was to effect the rupture of an irksome tie that led Henry Wainwright to murder Harriet Lane deliberately and in cold blood.
In this case the tie was unsanctified, but it was not more inconvenient than that which urged Greenacre to a similar crime.
In cold-blooded premeditation it rivaled that of the Mannings.
As in that case, the grave had been dug long in anticipation, and the chloride of lime purchased to destroy the corpse.
Henry Wainwright's impassioned denial of his crime, even after it had been brought fully home to him, has many parallels in the criminal records.
His disclaimer, distinct and detailed on every point, was intended simply for effect.
Wainwright's demeanor after sentence has been described in the last chapter.
But a conversation overheard between the two brothers in Newgate satisfactorily exonerated Thomas Wainwright.
Poisoning has still its victims.
The trial of Miss Edmunds was transferred to the Central Criminal Court under Lord Campbell's Act, already referred to.
She was found guilty.
It will be remembered that she made a statement which led to the empaneling of a jury of matrons, who decided that there was no cause for an arrest of judgment.
Kate Webster followed the same course; but these pleas of pregnancy are not common now-a-days.
The still more recent cases of poisoning which have occurred were not connected with Newgate.
Conviction was obtained through the evidence of the steward and two of the least culpable of the crew.
In Newgate the 'Lennie' mutineers were extremely well behaved.
Resolute, determined-looking men, their courage broke down in confinement.
He had steadfastly refused to eat meat on some religions scruples, and for the same reason would not touch soup.
Of the lesser criminals, forgers, thieves, swindlers, Newgate continued to receive its full share up to the last.
But there were few cases so remarkable as the great ones already recorded.
The Chronicles of Newgate, Volume 2. By Arthur Griffiths. Section 22. Newgate Reformed.
The time at length approached when a radical and complete change was to come over the old city jail.
It was impossible for Newgate to escape for ever the influences pressing so strongly towards prison reform.
Elsewhere the spirit had been more or less active, although not uniformly or always to the same extent.
Nor must it be overlooked that this, the first model prison, although obtained at a considerable cost, became actually what its name implied.
Major Jebb, R.E., and the two prison inspectors, Messrs. Crawford and Russell, with whose names the reader is already familiar.
The movement thus laudably initiated by the Government soon spread to the provinces.
Some jurisdictions, greatly to their credit, strove at once to follow the lead of the central authority.
This list included Wakefield, Leeds, Kirkdale, Manchester, Birmingham, and Dublin.
Liverpool was building a new prison with a thousand cells, the county of Surrey one with seven hundred.
The cost in each varied considerably, the general average being from £120 to £130 per cell.
Other jurisdictions were less prompt to recognize their responsibilities, the city of London among the number, as I shall presently show at length.
These were either satisfied with a makeshift, and modified existing buildings, without close regard to their suitability, or for a long time did nothing at all.
Among the latter were notably the counties of Cheshire, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, Suffolk, Nottinghamshire, the East and North Ridings of Yorkshire.
The south and west of England were also very laggard, and many years were still to elapse before the prisons in these parts were properly reconstituted.
But about 1850 the two sides were distinctly hostile, and the controversy ran high.
High authorities were in favor of continuous separation.
Prison chaplains of experience and high repute, such as Messrs. Field, Clay, Kingsmill, Burt, and Osborne, also advocated it.
Another argument was, that it afforded more hope of the reformation of criminals.
The opposing champions were not slow to find faults and flaws in the system they condemned.
This variety was often extended to all branches of prison economy.
There was an absolute want of uniformity in dietaries; in some prisons it was too liberal, in others too low.
The amount of exercise varied from one or two hours daily to half the working day.
The use of gas or some other means of lighting might be adopted, but more often was dispensed with.
In a great number of prisons no provision was made for the education of prisoners, in some others there was a sufficient staff of schoolmasters and instructors.
The discipline also varied greatly, from the severely penal to the culpably lax.
The latter had reference more especially to a proposal emanating from Mr. Charles Pearson himself.
His plan was to devote the whole labor of prisoners sentenced to any term between three months and four years to agriculture.
District prisons were to be established for this purpose, each of which would be in the heart of a farm of a thousand acres.
The prisoners were to cultivate the land and raise sufficient produce for their own support.
Mr. Pearson backed up his recommendations by many sound arguments.
Such excellent returns might be counted upon, that a margin of profit would be left after the cost of the prisons had been defrayed.
The hope of reward might do much, but no system of penal discipline is complete unless it can also count upon the fear of punishment.
Mr. Pearson seems to have taken for granted that all prisoners would behave well in his district prisons.
But an open farm of a thousand acres would have offered abundant chances of escape, which some at least would have attempted, probably with success.
There was no longer, or at worst but rarely, and for short periods, the same overcrowding.
This was obviated by the frequent sessions of the Central Criminal Court, and the utilization of the two subsidiary prisons in Giltspur Street and Southwark.
But reformation was only skin deep. Below the surface many of the old evils still rankled.
Some attempt at supervision was exercised by the night watchman stationed on the leads, who might hear what went on inside.
If any disturbance reached his ears, he reported the case to the governor, who next morning visited the ward in fault, and asked for the culprit.
The enforcement of discipline depended upon the want of honor among thieves.
These disciplinary improvements were, however, only slowly and gradually introduced.
Other changes affecting the condition and proper treatment of prisoners were not made until the inspector had urged and recommended them.
The Corporation seems to have introduced these salutary changes without hesitation.
It was less prompt apparently in dealing with structural alterations and improvements.
Well-founded complaints had been made of the want of heating appliances in the jail.
The wards had open fires, but the separate cells were not warmed at all.
This, with a scheme for limiting the jail to untried prisoners, had been urgently recommended by Lord John Russell in 1830.
The Corporation had agreed to spend £20,000 on alterations, but £60,000 would suffice to reconstruct.
He forwarded plans prepared by the inspectors of prisons, not for blind adoption, but as a guide.
The preference given to the Pentonville system destroyed all hopes of a complete reformation of Newgate.
In 1845 the Jail Committee brought forward a definite proposal to purchase ground in the immediate vicinity for the erection of a new jail.
The site of which was to be sold to Christ's Hospital, but the intention was of course to embody and absorb old Newgate in the new construction.
But when this suggestion was brought before the court of aldermen, various amendments were proposed.
It was urged that the area selected for purchase must be excessively costly to acquire, and still quite inadequate for the city needs.
The Home Secretary had laid it down that at least five acres would be indispensable, and such an area it was impossible to obtain within the limits of the city.
Now for the first time the Tuffnell estate in Holloway was mentioned.
The Corporation owned lands there covering from nineteen to twenty acres.
Eventually Holloway was decided upon as a site for the new city prison.
The necessary preliminaries took some time, but the contracts for the new building were completed in 1849, when the works were commenced.
The prison was to contain four hundred and four prisoners, and the estimated expenditure was £79,000.
It was intended as far as possible that, except awaiting trial, no prisoner should find himself relegated to Newgate.
With the reduction of numbers to be accommodated, there was ample space in Newgate for its reconstruction on the most approved modern lines.
The old buildings were entirely disused, and the whole of the inmates of Newgate were kept constantly in separate confinement.
The Act for private executions led to the erection of the gallows shed in the exercising yard, and at the flank of the passage from the condemned cells.
But no structural alterations were made from the date first quoted until the time of closing the prison in 1881.
But in the interval very comprehensive and, I think it must be admitted, salutary changes were successively introduced into the management of prisons.
The last inquiry into the condition and management of our jails and houses of correction was that made by the Lords' Committee in 1863.
The inquiry was most searching and complete, and the committee spoke plainly in its report.
The varieties in construction were still very marked.
In many prisons the prisoners were still associated, and, from the want of a sufficient number of cells, the principle of separation was still greatly neglected.
Great numbers were not lighted at night, and were without means by which their inmates could communicate, in case of urgent necessity, with their keepers.
Still greater were the differences with regard to employment. The various authorities held widely different opinions as to what constituted hard labor.
Here the tread-wheel was in use, there cellular cranks, or hard-labor machines.
At other prisons "shot-drill," the lifting and carrying of heavy round shot, was the favorite method of inflicting penal labor.
With these differences were others as opposed concerning industrial occupation.
In dietaries, again, the same wide diversity of practice obtained.
The efforts made by Sir James Graham years before to introduce uniformity in this particular had failed of effect.
The Secretary of State's suggested scale of diet had seldom been closely followed.
In some places the dietary was too full, in others too meager. Its constituents were not of the most suitable character.
More animal food was given than was necessary.
Vegetables, especially the potato, that most valuable anti-scorbutic, was too often omitted.
In a word, the value of diet as a part of penal discipline was still insufficiently recognized.
This suggestion was adopted in the Act of 1865, which followed the committee's report, and of which more directly.
Clause 92, Schedule 1 of that act authorized the use of plank beds, which were adopted in many prisons.
Their origin it will be seen dates back much further than that.
Beds might well be made hard and their use strictly limited.
According to this committee of 1863, beds in the smaller and most carelessly conducted prisons formed a large element in the life of a prisoner.
In one jail fifteen hours were spent in bed out of the twenty-four. This was in keeping with other grave defects and omissions.
The minor borough prisons were the worst blot on the still dark and imperfect system.
They were very numerous, very imperfect in construction and management, and they were very little required.
In them, according to the committee, the old objectionable practices were still in full force.
There was unrestrained association of untried and convicted, juvenile with adult prisoners, vagrants, misdemeanants, felons.
Prisoners still slept two in a bed.
In one prison the bedsteads had been removed lest the prisoners should break them up and convert them into weapons of offense.
The prison buildings were in many places out of repair; other houses often overlooked them.
A single officer was the only custodian and disciplinary authority in the jail.
Complete idleness was tolerated; there was neither penal labor nor light employment.
The prisoners inter-communicated freely, and exercised the most injurious, corrupting influences upon one another.
The committee might well suggest the abolition of these jails, or their amalgamation with the larger county establishments in their immediate neighborhood.
Some idea of the comparative uselessness of these small borough prisons was conveyed by some figures quoted by the committee.
However, it now laid down in plain language and with precise details the requirements of a good jail system.
Hard labor of the first and second class was carefully defined.
The infliction of punishment more or less uniform was thus aimed at.
On the other hand, new and careful regulations were framed to secure the moral and material well-being of the inmates of the jails.
The law made it imperative that every prison should have a prison chapel, and that daily and Sunday services should be held.
Steps were taken to provide the illiterate with secular instruction.
No less close was the care as regards preservation of health.
Dietaries were drawn up for adoption on the recommendation of a committee of experts.
Baths were provided, ablutions ordered, and all appliances to insure personal cleanliness.
Under them the governor or jailer was held strictly responsible.
The books and journals he was to keep were minutely specified, and his constant presence in or near the jail was insisted upon.
The latter was rendered nearly impossible by the penalties imposed on persons bringing spirituous liquors into the jail.
The old custom, so fruitful of the worst evils, of keeping a tap inside the prison was made illegal.
The Act of 1865 also encouraged and empowered the local authorities to "alter, enlarge, or rebuild" their prisons.
The funds necessary would be advanced by the Public Works Loan Commissioners, and the interest might be charged against the county or borough rates.
But the act was not limited to permissive legislation. Its provisions and enactments were backed up by certain penalties.
He could in the first place withhold the government grant in aid of prison funds by refusing the certificate to the Treasury upon which the allowance was paid.
The latter too was to be laid before the House of Commons.
Yet the law was seldom if ever enforced.
It was nearly impossible for them to exercise a very close supervision over the whole of the prisons of the country.
There were only two of them, and they could not visit each prison more than once in each year, sometimes not oftener than once in eighteen months.
As the years passed, great want of uniformity continued to prevail throughout the prisons of the United Kingdom.
The whole question assumed sufficient importance to become a part of the Government program when Lord Beaconsfield took office in 1874.
The Prisons Bill of 1876 contemplated the transfer of the prisons to Government.
Three years after the advent of the prison commissioners, it was decided that Newgate was an excessively costly and redundant establishment.
Marion Harland's Cookery for Beginners. Bread Sponge and Breakfast Breads.
Bread raised with what is known to bakers as a “sponge,” requires more time and a trifle more work than the simpler form for which I have just already given directions.
Sponge-making is, therefore, an important if not an essential accomplishment in a cook, be she novice or veteran.
Three potatoes of fair size, peeled and boiled mealy.
Five tablespoonfuls of yeast. One tablespoonful of white sugar.
One tablespoonful of butter.
Three cups of lukewarm water in which the potatoes were boiled, strained through a coarse cloth.
One heaping cup of sifted flour.
Put the potatoes into a large bowl or tray and mash them to powder with a potato beetle, or a wooden spoon.
While still hot, mix in the sugar and butter, beating all to a lumpless cream.
Beat hard one minute before pouring in the yeast.
Now whip up the batter with a wooden spoon for another minute, and the sponge is made.
Throw a cloth over the bowl and set by for five or six hours to rise.
If you intend to bake in the forenoon, make the sponge at bedtime. If in the afternoon, early in the morning.
When the sponge is light sift a quart and a cup of flour into a bowl or tray with two teaspoonfuls of salt.
Into a hollow, like a crater in the middle of the flour, empty your sponge-bowl, and work the flour down into it.
Wash out the bowl with a little lukewarm water and add this to the dough. If it should prove too soft, work in, cautiously, a little more flour.
If too stiff, warm water, a spoonful at a time until you can handle the paste easily. The danger is in getting it too stiff. Now.
One quart of Graham flour, one cup of white flour.
One half cup of Indian meal. One half cup of molasses. Two teaspoonfuls of salt. Soda, the size of a pea.
Half the quantity of sponge given in preceding receipt.
Warm water for rinsing bowl -- about half a cup.
Put the brown or Graham flour unsifted into the bread-bowl.
Sift into it white flour, meal and salt, and stir up well while dry.
Into the “crater” dug out in the middle, pour the sponge, warm water, the molasses, and soda dissolved in hot water.
Knead as you would white bread, and set aside for the rising.
It will not swell so fast as the white, so give yourself more time for making it.
Take care that it does not burn in baking. The molasses renders it liable to scorching.
The oven must be steady, but not so hot as for white bread, nor will the Graham bread be done quite so soon as that made of bolted flour.
Turn the pans once while baking, moving them as gently as possible.
If rudely shaken or jarred, there will be heavy streaks in loaves.
Graham bread is wholesome and sweet, and ought to be eaten frequently in every family, particularly by young people whose bones and teeth are in forming.
After mixing your bread in the morning either with sponge or with yeast, divide the kneaded dough into two portions.
Mould one into a round ball, and set aside for a loaf as already directed.
Make a hole in the middle of the other batch and pour into it a tablespoonful of butter, just melted, but not hot.
Close the dough over it, dust your hands and kneading-board with flour and work in the shortening until the dough is elastic and ceases to be sticky.
Put it into a floured bowl, cover with a cloth and set away out of draught and undue heat, for three hours.
Knead it again, then, and wait upon its rising for another three hours. The dough should be as soft as can be handled.
When it is light for the second time flour your board, rubbing in the flour and blowing lightly away what does not adhere to the surface.
Toss the lump dough upon it and knead thoroughly for five minutes.
Flour a rolling-pin and roll the dough into a sheet not more than half an inch thick.
Arrange the rolls in regular rows in the pan about a quarter of an inch apart.
Cover with a cloth and set nearer the fire than you dared trust the dough, and let them rise for an hour.
Peep under the cloth two or three times to see whether they rise evenly, and turn the pan around once that all may be equally exposed to the heat.
Break the rolls apart from one another and eat warm. They are also good cold, and if the directions be followed implicitly, very good always.
Graham Rolls are made by treating the dough mixed for Graham bread as above and following the foregoing receipt in every section, but allowing more time for rising and baking.
They are even better when cold than hot.
Breakfast Biscuit.
Two cups of fresh milk slightly warmed.
One quart and a cup of flour sifted.
Five tablespoonfuls of yeast.
One even tablespoonful of white sugar.
One even teaspoonful of salt.
Bit of soda as large as a pea, dissolved in hot water.
One tablespoonful of butter, just melted, not hot.
Yolk of one egg beaten light.
Into a second hollow pour the yeast and knead thoroughly for fifteen minutes.
Wrap bowl and biscuit in a thick cloth and set to rise where it will neither become chilled nor sour over night.
Study the temperature in different parts of the kitchen and kitchen closets to the end of finding the best places for raising dough and sponge.
Bake from twenty to twenty-five minutes in a quick oven, turning the pan around once, quickly and lightly.
Break apart from one another and pile on a plate, throwing a clean doily or a small napkin over them. Break open at table.
Hot rolls and muffins should never be cut.
One word with regard to getting up early in order to give dough a chance for the second rising.
It is not a wholesome practice for any woman -- least of all a young girl to be out of bed two hours before she eats her breakfast.
Studying upon an empty stomach provokes dyspepsia and injures the eyes.
Active exercise in like circumstances tempts debility and disease.
Yet our bread and rolls must be looked after at the proper time.
Have yourself called on biscuit mornings an hour earlier than usual.
Rise, wash face and hands, rinse the mouth out and brush back the hair.
Put on stockings and slippers, such underclothing as may be needed to prevent cold, a wrapper and the kitchen apron.
Cover your hair entirely with a handkerchief or sweeping cap.
Before beginning operations downstairs eat a half-slice of dry bread or a biscuit.
You will not relish it, but take it all the same to appease the empty, discontented stomach.
Having made out your rolls and tucked them up snugly for the final rise, return to your chamber for a comfortable bath and toilet.
When habited for the day in all except the outer gown, collar, etc., slip on the wrapper again and run down to put the biscuits in the oven.
Unless it is too hot, they will get no harm while you finish dressing in ten minutes, just in season to turn the pan.
From the beginning of your apprenticeship in housewifery, learn how to "dovetail" your duties neatly into one another.
Master these, and do not let them master you.
Weave the little duties in and under and among what seem to be the greater.
While your bread is taking a three hours’ rise, you are free in body and mind for other things.
The grand secret of keeping house well and without worry, lies in the art of packing and fitting different kinds of work and in picking up the minutes.
Other things besides rising dough get on quite as well without your standing by to watch them.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 6.
September 30, 1934.
Three months have passed since I talked with you shortly after the adjournment of the Congress.
Tonight I continue that report, though, because of the shortness of time, I must defer a number of subjects to a later date.
These governmental and industrial developments hold promise of new achievements for the nation.
Our first problem was, of course, the banking situation because, as you know, the banks had collapsed.
This has given safety to millions of depositors in these banks.
I believe it will be.
The average person almost always loses.
In meeting the problems of industrial recovery the chief agency of the government has been the National Recovery Administration.
Under these codes, in the industries covered, child labor has been eliminated.
The work day and the work week have been shortened.
Minimum wages have been established and other wages adjusted toward a rising standard of living.
Now it should not be expected that even employed labor and capital would be completely satisfied with present conditions.
Also, billions of dollars of invested capital have today a greater security of present and future earning power than before.
Nevertheless the gains of trade and industry, as a whole, have been substantial.
We have the right to expect that this driving power will be given patriotically and whole-heartedly to our nation.
I would not minimize the inevitable losses to employers and employees and to the general public through such conflicts.
Machinery set up by the federal government has provided some new methods of adjustment.
Both employers and employees must share the blame of not using them as fully as they should.
We have passed through more than a year of education.
I shall not ask either employers or employees permanently to lay aside the weapons common to industrial war.
Closely allied to the N.R.A.
I answer that no country, however rich, can afford the waste of its human resources.
Demoralization caused by vast unemployment is our greatest extravagance.
Morally, it is the greatest menace to our social order.
What may be necessary for those countries is not my responsibility to determine.
I do not want to think that it is the destiny of any American to remain permanently on relief rolls.
Now that these people are coming out of their storm cellars, they forget that there ever was a storm.
They point to England.
They would have you believe that England has made progress out of her depression by a do-nothing policy, by letting nature take her course.
Did England let nature take her course? No.
And let it be recorded that the British bankers helped.
Nearly all Americans are sensible and calm people.
We are not frightened by reactionary lawyers or political editors.
All of these cries have been heard before.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 7.
April 28, 1935.
Since my annual message to the Congress on January fourth, last, I have not addressed the general public over the air.
In the many weeks since that time the Congress has devoted itself to the arduous task of formulating legislation necessary to the country's welfare.
It has made and is making distinct progress.
Before I come to any of the specific measures, however, I want to leave in your minds one clear fact.
The administration and the Congress are not proceeding in any haphazard fashion in this task of government.
Each of our steps has a definite relationship to every other step.
The job of creating a program for the nation's welfare is, in some respects, like the building of a ship.
At different points on the coast where I often visit they build great seagoing ships.
Before that time individual self- interest and group selfishness were paramount in public thinking.
The general good was at a discount.
Three years of hard thinking have changed the picture.
That is a tremendous gain for the principles of democracy.
The overwhelming majority of people in this country know how to sift the wheat from the chaff in what they hear and what they read.
Americans as a whole are feeling a lot better -- a lot more cheerful than for many, many years.
The most difficult place in the world to get a clear open perspective of the country as a whole is Washington.
That makes it particularly necessary for the Vice- President and for me to conceive of our duty toward the entire country.
I speak, therefore, tonight, to and of the American people as a whole.
My most immediate concern is in carrying out the purposes of the great work program just enacted by the Congress.
I shall not confuse my discussion by a multitude of figures. So many figures are quoted to prove so many things.
Sometimes it depends upon what paper you read and what broadcast you hear.
Therefore, let us keep our minds on two or three simple, essential facts in connection with this problem of unemployment.
It is true that while business and industry are definitely better our relief rolls are still too large.
However, for the first time in five years the relief rolls have declined instead of increased during the winter months.
They are still declining.
These measures are of two kinds.
Our social security legislation is an attempt to answer the first of these questions; our Works Relief program, the second.
The program for social security now pending before the Congress is a necessary part of the future unemployment policy of the government.
We must begin now to make provision for the future.
That is why our social security program is an important part of the complete picture.
Provisions for social security, however, are protections for the future.
Our problem is to put to work three and one-half million employable persons now on the relief rolls.
It is a problem quite as much for private industry as for the government.
Projects shall be of a nature that a considerable proportion of the money spent will go into wages for labor.
Projects will be sought which promise ultimate return to the federal treasury of a considerable proportion of the costs.
Funds allotted for each project should be actually and promptly spent and not held over until later years.
In all cases projects must be of a character to give employment to those on the relief rolls.
I next want to make it clear exactly how we shall direct the work.
The group will also include representatives of cities, and of labor, farming, banking and industry.
Moreover, this Division will be charged with keeping projects moving on schedule.
These agencies, therefore, will simply be doing on a somewhat enlarged scale the same sort of things that they have been doing.
For many months preparations have been under way.
The allotment of funds for desirable projects has already begun.
The key men for the major responsibilities of this great task already have been selected.
Our responsibility is to all of the people in this country.
Our attack upon these enemies must be without stint and without discrimination.
No sectional, no political distinctions can be permitted.
It should be remembered that in every big job there are some imperfections.
The most effective means of preventing such evils in this Works Relief program will be the eternal vigilance of the American people themselves.
It is time to provide a smashing answer for those cynical men who say that a democracy cannot be honest and efficient.
If you will help, this can be done.
I, therefore, hope you will watch the work in every corner of this Nation.
Feel free to criticize. Tell me of instances where work can be done better, or where improper practices prevail.
I now come, my friends, to a part of the remaining business before the Congress.
The National Industrial Recovery Act expires on the sixteenth of June.
After careful consideration, I have asked the Congress to extend the life of this useful agency of government.
I consider this legislation a positive recovery measure.
Power production in this country is virtually back to the 1929 peak.
By far the greater part of the general decline in utility securities had occurred before I was inaugurated.
Even more significantly it has given the country as a whole an uneasy apprehension of overconcentrated economic power.
A business that loses the confidence of its customers and the goodwill of the public cannot long continue to be a good risk for the investor.
This legislation will serve the investor by ending the conditions which have caused that lack of confidence and goodwill.
It will not destroy values.
The answer to this demand was the Federal Reserve System.
Certain proposals made to amend the Federal Reserve Act deserve prompt and favorable action by the Congress.
They are a minimum of wise readjustments of our Federal Reserve System in the light of past experience and present needs.
These measures I have mentioned are, in large part, the program which under my constitutional duty I have recommended to the Congress.
They are essential factors in a rounded program for national recovery.
Never since my inauguration in March, 1933, have I felt so unmistakably the atmosphere of recovery.
But it is more than the recovery of the material basis of our individual lives.
It is the recovery of confidence in our democratic processes and institutions.
We have survived all of the arduous burdens and the threatening dangers of a great economic calamity.
We have in the darkest moments of our national trials retained our faith in our own ability to master our destiny.
That faith is receiving its just reward.
For that we can be thankful to the God who watches over America.
The Fireside Chats of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, by Franklin D Roosevelt, Section 9.
March 9, 1937. Part one.
Last Thursday I described in detail certain economic problems which everyone admits now face the nation.
Tonight, sitting at my desk in the White House, I make my first radio report to the people in my second term of office.
I am reminded of that evening in March, four years ago, when I made my first radio report to you.
We were then in the midst of the great banking crisis.
Today's recovery proves how right that policy was.
But when, almost two years later, it came before the Supreme Court its constitutionality was upheld only by a five-to-four vote.
The change of one vote would have thrown all the affairs of this great Nation back into hopeless chaos.
National laws are needed to complete that program.
Individual or local or state effort alone cannot protect us in 1937 any better than ten years ago.
It will take time -- and plenty of time -- to work out our remedies administratively even after legislation is passed.
Four years ago action did not come until the eleventh hour.
It was almost too late.
The American people have learned from the depression.
We are at a crisis in our ability to proceed with that protection.
It is a quiet crisis. There are no lines of depositors outside closed banks.
But to the far-sighted it is far-reaching in its possibilities of injury to America.
The three horses are, of course, the three branches of government -- the Congress, the Executive and the courts.
Two of the horses are pulling in unison today; the third is not.
It is the American people themselves who are in the driver's seat.
It is the American people themselves who want the furrow plowed.
It is the American people themselves who expect the third horse to pull in unison with the other two.
I hope that you have re-read the Constitution of the United States in these past few weeks.
Like the Bible, it ought to be read again and again.
But the framers went further.
For nearly twenty years there was no conflict between the Congress and the Court.
Congress passed a statute which, in 1803, the Court said violated an express provision of the Constitution.
The Court claimed the power to declare it unconstitutional and did so declare it.
In the last four years the sound rule of giving statutes the benefit of all reasonable doubt has been cast aside.
The Court has been acting not as a judicial body, but as a policy-making body.
That is not only my accusation.
It is the accusation of most distinguished justices of the present Supreme Court.
I have not the time to quote to you all the language used by dissenting justices in many of these cases.
And three other justices agreed with him.
And two other justices agreed with him.
And two other justices agreed with him.
We are under a Constitution, but the Constitution is what the judges say it is.
We must find a way to take an appeal from the Supreme Court to the Constitution itself.
We want a Supreme Court which will do justice under the Constitution -- not over it.
In our courts we want a government of laws and not of men.
I want -- as all Americans want -- an independent judiciary as proposed by the framers of the Constitution.
It does not mean a judiciary so independent that it can deny the existence of facts which are universally recognized.
In other words, we said we would seek an amendment only if every other possible means by legislation were to fail.
We must have men worthy and equipped to carry out impartial justice.
In forty-five out of the forty-eight states of the Union, judges are chosen not for life but for a period of years.
In many states judges must retire at the age of seventy.
In the case of Supreme Court justices, that pension is $20,000 a year.
Section 10. March 9, 1937. Part 2.
That plan has two chief purposes.
This plan will save our national Constitution from hardening of the judicial arteries.
Consequently, although there never can be more than fifteen, there may be only fourteen, or thirteen, or twelve.
And there may be only nine.
There is nothing novel or radical about this idea.
It seeks to maintain the federal bench in full vigor.
The statute would apply to all the courts in the federal system.
There is general approval so far as the lower federal courts are concerned.
The plan has met opposition only so far as the Supreme Court of the United States itself is concerned.
If such a plan is good for the lower courts it certainly ought to be equally good for the highest court from which there is no appeal.
Let me answer this question with a bluntness that will end all honest misunderstanding of my purposes.
Is it a dangerous precedent for the Congress to change the number of the justices? The Congress has always had, and will have, that power.
Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln and Ulysses S. Grant.
It is the clear intention of our public policy to provide for a constant flow of new and younger blood into the judiciary.
Normally every President appoints a large number of district and circuit court judges and a few members of the Supreme Court.
Until my first term practically every President of the United States has appointed at least one member of the Supreme Court.
President Hoover, three, including a Chief Justice.
Such a succession of appointments should have provided a Court well-balanced as to age.
Thus a sound public policy has been defeated.
I now propose that we establish by law an assurance against any such ill-balanced court in the future.
Like all lawyers, like all Americans, I regret the necessity of this controversy.
But the welfare of the United States, and indeed of the Constitution itself, is what we all must think about first.
Our difficulty with the Court today rises not from the Court as an institution but from human beings within it.
The Court itself can best undo what the Court has done.
I have thus explained to you the reasons that lie behind our efforts to secure results by legislation within the Constitution.
There are many types of amendment proposed.
Each one is radically different from the other.
There is no substantial groups within the Congress or outside it who are agreed on any single amendment.
It would take months or years to get substantial agreement upon the type and language of the amendment.
It would take months and years thereafter to get a two-thirds majority in favor of that amendment in both Houses of the Congress.
Then would come the long course of ratification by three-fourths of all the states.
Oh! I was for an amendment all right, but this amendment you proposed is not the kind of amendment that I was thinking about.
Two groups oppose my plan on the ground that they favor a constitutional amendment.
The first includes those who fundamentally object to social and economic legislation along modern lines.
This is the same group who during the campaign last Fall tried to block the mandate of the people.
Now they are making a last stand.
To them I say: I do not think you will be able long to fool the American people as to your purposes.
To them I say: we cannot rely on an amendment as the immediate or only answer to our present difficulties.
Look at these strange bed-fellows of yours.
And remember one thing more.
This proposal of mine will not infringe in the slightest upon the civil or religious liberties so dear to every American.
My record as Governor and President proves my devotion to those liberties.
You who know me can have no fear that I would tolerate the destruction by any branch of government of any part of our heritage of freedom.
The workers were not fooled by that propaganda then. The people of America will not be fooled by such propaganda now.
First, because I believe that it can be passed at this session of the Congress.
It is my purpose to restore that balance.
I seek to make American democracy succeed.
You and I will do our part.
The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5.
Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. Biology. Chapter 7. Organic Functions. Part One.
Animals further needed muscles for locomotion and nerves for sensibility.
They retain the hydrogen and the carbon, exhale the superfluous oxygen and absorb little or no nitrogen.
The essential character of vegetable life is the exhalation of oxygen, which is effected through the agency of light.
Animals, on the contrary, derive their nourishment either directly or indirectly from plants.
They get rid of the superfluous hydrogen and carbon and accumulate nitrogen.
The relations of plants and animals to the atmosphere are therefore inverse.
The plant withdraws water and carbonic acid from the atmosphere, the animal contributes both to it.
Thus wrote Cuvier in 1828.
Many animals of even complex structure which live parasitically within others are wholly devoid of an alimentary cavity.
On the other hand, the definition thus amended will exclude all ordinary vegetable organisms.
Cuvier himself practically gives up his second distinctive mark when he admits that it is wanting in the simpler animals.
Amylaceous and saccharine substances are largely manufactured, even by the highest animals.
They absorb oxygen and give out carbonic acid.
With a qualification, to be considered presently, the answer to this question is undoubtedly in the affirmative.
On each lobe of the bi-lobed leaf of Venus flytrap are three delicate filaments which stand out at right angles from the surface of the leaf.
The reflex action of the snail is the result of the presence of a nervous system in the animal.
Hence it is conceivable that even the simplest living being may possess a nervous system.
And it must be allowed to be possible that further research may reveal the existence of something comparable to a nervous system in plants.
Neither protein, nor fat, nor starch, nor sugar, nor any substance in the slightest degree resembling them has formed part of the food of the bean.
Whence it follows that the bean has taken in only the raw materials of its fabric and has manufactured them into bean-stuffs.
In fact, the bean obtains two of the absolutely indispensable elements of its substance from two distinct sources.
The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler. Biology. Chapter 8.
Life Processes. Part One.
Nutrition thus, as has been pointed out, makes it possible to classify most organisms as animals or plants.
The fact is that they are on the border line, are neither plants nor animals but simply organisms.
Since they cannot be classified, it is necessary that they be listed both under botany and zoology, in order to make sure that they will not be omitted entirely.
Haeckel proposed once to include all one-celled animals and plants in a third kingdom to be called Protista (meaning the first of all life).
He says: Animals are organisms of fixed and definite form, in which the cell-body is not covered with a cellulose wall.
There is no special excretory organ, and, except in the case of certain reproductive bodies, there is usually no locomotion.
The important point to recognize is that these boundaries are artificial and that there are no scientific frontiers in Nature.
As in the liquefaction of gases, there is a "critical point" at which the substance under experiment is neither gaseous nor liquid.
These comparisons will, however, be translated into terms applicable to any species of higher plants or animals.
These materials are used by the animal in the manufacture of new protoplasm to take the place of that which has been used up.
It is, however, impossible for the animal to build these materials directly into the substance of its own body.
These substances, which are dissolved in a watery liquid to form the digestive fluid, are secreted by the walls of the alimentary tube.
Through their action the solid portions are liquefied and the food is rendered capable of absorption into the body proper.
We have here the direct absorption into the body proper of food-stuffs precisely as the animal takes in water and oxygen.
Of the substances the solids (salts, etc.) must be dissolved in water before they can be taken in.
Water and dissolved salts continually pass by diffusion from the soil into the roots, where together they constitute the sap.
Entering the chlorophyll bodies, the kinetic energy of sunlight is applied to the decomposition of carbon dioxide and water.
Thus the leaf of a green plant in the light is continually absorbing carbon dioxide and giving forth free oxygen.
Carbon dioxide and water contain no potential energy, since the affinities of their constituent elements are completely satisfied.
In this way some of the radiant and kinetic energy of the sun comes to be stored up as potential energy in the starch.
This power is possessed by green plants alone; all other organisms being dependent for energy upon the potential energy of ready-made food.
The plant absorbs also a small amount of kinetic energy, independently of the sunlight, in the form of heat.
This, however, is probably not a source of vital energy, but only contributes to the maintenance of the body temperature.
In the plant the inorganic matter in water from the soil are absorbed by the roots and carried up definite tubes in the woody part of the stem.
This is done by diastase, an enzyme of plant cells.
The change is from starch to a sugar capable of diffusion.
Dissolved in water, the sugar is transported down delicate tubes, chiefly in the growing bark region of the stem.
However, the result in distributed food is the same in the plant and in the animal.
In the cells the foods undergo metabolic changes.
In an animal the foods in the circulating liquids, blood and lymph, are selected and absorbed by the cells.
The excess undergoes oxidation and forms nitrogen excretions.
Fat and carbohydrate foods, then, never become living matter.
They may be stored, especially as fat, until needed for oxidation to supply energy.
The building up of the protoplasm from proteids is anabolism, constructive metabolism.
The destruction of protoplasm, excess proteids or the fat and carbohydrate foods is catabolism, destructive metabolism.
In the plant, starch, as has been seen, is first formed in the chlorophyll-bodies.
The particles of this newly formed compound are incorporated into the protoplasm.
Apparently when this reserve supply is finally needed at any point in the plant, it is again changed to glucose and transported thither.
It is probable that new leaves and new tissues generally are always formed in part from this reserve starch.
In the plant as in the animal metabolism must consist of anabolic and catabolic processes.
The construction in the cells of new proteid from the absorbed carbohydrate and the materials from the soil is true anabolism.
It is also clear that catabolism or oxidation for the liberation of energy occurs as in animals, but this process is slower.
Probably foods containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen are the sources of energy in the higher plants as in animals.
In both plants and animals simple waste substances result from the catabolic processes in the cells.
In the animal carbon dioxide, water and nitrogen compounds are the chief excretions.
They are absorbed by the circulating liquids and carried to the eliminating organs, lungs and kidneys chiefly, for elimination.
In both animals and plants oxygen is essential to the catabolic part of metabolism.
Hence oxygen must be supplied to the cells.
In the plant also oxygen is absorbed through the epidermis and stomata from the air.
This process is, however, obscured during the day because of the oxygen freed in the manufacture of starch which goes on at that time.
In non-green plants like the Indian pipe and mushrooms the breathing of oxygen and the excretion of carbon dioxide are as in the animal.
This is true also of green plants in darkness and even in the light of all parts of green plants except the chlorophyll-bodies.
These constitute a sort of extra mechanism, enabling green plants to make their own carbohydrate food.
The Science: History of the Universe, Volume 5. Edited by Francis Rolt-Wheeler.
Biology. Chapter 10. Morphology and Embryology, Part One.
In all these lines the facts are drawn together by a strong thread of unity.
There are numberless similarities and correlations and surprising uniformities.
It is, moreover, true that all living forms are but series of modifications and extensions of one single plan of structure.
The same laws of heredity, variability and of response to outside stimulus hold in all parts of the organic world.
All organisms have the same need of reproduction.
All are forced to make concession after concession to their surroundings, and in these concessions all progress in life consists.
And at last each organism or each alliance of organisms must come to the greatest concession of all, which is called death.
The unity in life, then, is not less a fact than is life's great diversity.
Whatever emphasis is laid upon the diversity of life, the essential unity of all organisms must not be forgotten.
First, it must be noted that some structures are not non-adaptive, that is, do not change to fit changed habits or conditions of life.
Such structures or organs are most often found internally.
Internal organs may persist unchanged and hence they offer good guides to classification.
On the other hand, external structures are likely to undergo adaptation when habits or conditions of life change.
In the second place, it must be noted that adaptations to similar conditions may result in superficial resemblances.
Homology thus means identity of structure which is the result of identity of parentage. It is the stamp of heredity.
It means blood relationship.
These principles of homology are essential to a correct interpretation of the facts of morphology.
The most striking fact of similar structure among plants and among animals is the existence of a common general plan in any group.
Since backboned animals are best known to most readers, they may be taken as an illustration.
The relation of skeleton and muscle in arthropods is exactly the reverse.
These, therefore, may well be called backboned animals.
All vertebrates, with few exceptions, and no other animals, have two and only two pair of limbs.
So much concerns the general plan of skeletal structures and is strongly suggestive of -- in fact it is inexplicable without -- common origin.
But much more remains which is not only suggestive, but demonstrative of such origin.
The existence of great similarities in vertebrate structure is not always fully recognized.
Extensive comparison, on the contrary, shows them to be the same, although the essential identity is obscured by adaptive modifications.
See, then, the difference between man's mode of working and Nature's.
Nature rarely makes new parts -- never, if she can avoid it -- but, on the contrary, adapts an old part to the new function.
Wiedersheim has recorded more than one hundred and eighty such structural reminiscences in man.
On the other hand, the theory of special creation can only maintain that these rudiments are formed for the sake of adhering to an ideal type.
This reasonable expectation, however, is far from being realized.
In numberless cases, such as that of the fore-limbs of serpents, no vestige of a rudiment is present.
Illustrations quoted from the works of Romanes and Le Conte will make this principle clear.
Now I do not deny that this view is a possible view; but I do deny that it is a probable one.
But according to the opposite view no reason can be assigned why such should be the case.
It is essentially a fish, and would be so classed if it remained in this condition.
The fish retains permanently this form, but the frog passes on.
Next, it forms first one pair and then another pair of legs; and meanwhile it begins to breathe also by lungs.
At this stage it breathes equally by lungs and by gills -- i.e., both air and water.
Then the gills gradually dry up, as the lungs develop, and they now breathe wholly by lungs, but still retain the tail.
The perennibranch passes through the fish stage to the perennibranch amphibian.
The caducibranch takes first the fish form, then the perennibranch form, and finally the caducibranch form, but goes no further.
Last, the anoura takes first the fish-form, then that of the perennibranch, then that of the caducibranch, and finally becomes anoura.
Now, this is undoubtedly the order of succession of forms in geological times -- i.e., in the phylogenic series.
Fishes first appeared in the Devonian and Upper Silurian in very reptilian or rather amphibian forms.
Then in the Carboniferous, fishes still continuing, there appeared the lowest -- i.e., most fish-like forms of amphibians.
These were undoubtedly perennibranchs. In the Permian and Triassic higher forms appeared, which were certainly caducibranch.
Finally, only in the Tertiary, so far as we yet know, do the highest form (anoura) appear.
The general similarity of the three series is complete.
The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. By Edgar J. Banks. Chapter 2. The Walls of Babylon.
In the old city of Damascus you climb to the hump of a tall fleet dromedary.
At first, paying little heed to you, she hesitates and glances anxiously about the desert as if in search of an enemy.
Now and then she reaches down to graze the thorny argool along the way.
The Damascus mosques and their minarets sink beneath the western sky.
Like a great ball of fire the sun sinks in the west.
The stars come out one by one and shine brighter than elsewhere as if to light you on your way.
Late at night the weary dromedary kneels, and on the ground, close beside her, you lie down to sleep.
Again, long before the stars have been scattered by the morning sun, you are on your way.
Day after day you travel on, scorched by the heat of noon-day, shivering in the chill winds of the night.
You have crossed the Arabian Desert, the first stage of the long journey to the walls of Babylon.
Here in the valley the water is sweet and the food abundant.
For ten days you follow down the river, through little villages and black tent encampments, among scenes of strange Arab life which never lose their charm.
Everywhere the valley is dotted with the mounds of buried cities carefully guarding the secrets of the centuries of long ago.
At last you see before you a mound rising like a mountain from the level plain.
Your journey is at an end. Before you is Babylon, the "Gate of God," as the old name means.
About you is all that remains of the second of the Seven Wonders of the World.
Babylon, even in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, was an old, old city.
There is a Hebrew tradition that it was the oldest of all cities, but now we know that great empires flourished and passed away before Babylon was built.
But in those very early days Babylon was little more than a shrine, surrounded with mud huts and date palms.
It was about 2250 B.C., when the great Hammurabi made it his capital, that it became the chief city of Babylonia.
Its history for the next fifteen hundred years or more is obscure.
We know the names of its kings, and the records speak of long wars with the Assyrians.
The place where the old city had stood for three thousand years again became a desert.
Esarhaddon, the son of Sinacherib, was the next King of Nineveh.
He rebuilt Babylon that in accordance with the ancient custom he might be crowned in the sacred city.
When Esarhaddon died, one of his sons, Samas-sum-yukin, was made King of Babylon.
Another son, Assurbanipal, or the great Sardanapalus of the Greeks, became the King of Nineveh.
War broke out between the two brothers, and again Babylon was captured.
The building of the Babylon so famous in history began with Nabopolassar.
He enlarged the old city, erected temples, and began the construction of its walls.
In 606, Nineveh, the old enemy of Babylon, fell, never to rise again.
The next year, in 605, Nabopolassar died, and Nebuchadnezzar succeeded him to the throne.
Early he married Amuhia, a daughter of the Medean king.
His military career began while he was still the crown prince, and his father was on the throne.
Then Syria and Palestine were added to his future empire.
In 597, when he sent his army to Jerusalem, he won the hatred of the Jews by taking Jehoiakin, the King, captive.
Centuries afterward, even to this day, Jewish mothers teach their children to hate his name.
Late in his life, in 567, he invaded Egypt.
During all his reign there was little peace in his great mixed turbulent empire.
The walls of the palaces of many of the Assyrian kings were lined with great stone slabs engraved with reliefs and sometimes with the portrait of a king.
But in Babylonia stone was difficult to obtain, and sculptures were very rare.
Therefore it was useless to hope that Nebuchadnezzar's portrait would be found on his palace walls.
About the head was an inscription in Greek characters saying that the face was that of Nebuchadnezzar.
Unfortunately, the little stone seal, perhaps the only one to preserve for us his features, appears to have been lost for ever.
Its impression shows the face of a beardless young man, intelligent and refined.
Such was the appearance of the builder of the walls of Babylon.
Religion and cruelty frequently go hand in hand, and Nebuchadnezzar was exceedingly religious.
Though a great warrior, it was not for his military deeds that he was best known.
However cruel and religiously intolerant Nebuchadnezzar may have been, he was undoubtedly the greatest builder the world has ever seen.
There is scarcely one of the thousands of ruin mounds in Babylonia which does not contain bricks bearing his name.
There is scarcely a royal record from his reign which is not chiefly occupied with descriptions of his building operations.
Tradition says that to please his foreign wife from the mountainous country he built the famous hanging gardens, but that may be only a tradition.
His palace in Babylon was one of the world's largest buildings, but the walls with which he protected his palace and city were the wonder of the whole world.
The ancients never tired of describing them.
Fortunately in several of his long inscriptions, recently discovered in the Babylonian mounds, Nebuchadnezzar speaks of the building of the walls.
I completed Imgur-Bel and Nimitti-Bel, the great walls of Babylon, the mighty city, the city of his exalted power.
At the entrance of the great gates I erected strong bulls of bronze, and terrible serpents standing upright.
My father did that which no previous king had done.
I raised its summit mountain high. I constructed a moat-wall of burned bricks about the west wall of Babylon.
My father built the moat-wall of the Arachtu canal securely with mortar and bricks.
To the west of Babylon, at a greater distance from the outer wall, I constructed an enclosing wall four thousand cubits in length about the city.
I dug its moat to the water level.
I walled up its side with mortar and burned bricks, and I united it securely with the moat-walls of my father.
Along its edge I built a great wall of mortar and burned bricks mountain high.
Yet as large and lofty as they were, they were completed in fifteen days.
He also erected elevated places for walking, of stone; and made it resemble mountains: and built it so that it might be planted with all sorts of trees.
Of all the ancient descriptions of the famous walls and the city they protected, that of Herodotus is the fullest.
While such is its size, in magnificence there is no other city that approaches to it.
And here I may not omit to tell the use to which the mould dug out of the great moat was turned, nor the manner wherein the wall was wrought.
In the circuit of the wall are a hundred gates, all of brass, with brazen lintels and sideposts.
Lumps of bitumen are found in great abundance in this river.
The city is divided into two portions by the river which runs through the midst of it.
This river is the Euphrates, a broad, deep, swift stream, which rises in Armenia, and empties itself into the Erythraean Sea.
The outer wall is the main defense of the city.
There is, however, a second inner wall, of less thickness than the first, but very little inferior to it in strength.
The center of each division of the town is occupied by a fortress.
The ascent to the top is on the outside, by a path which winds round all the towers.
When one is about halfway up, one finds a resting place and seats, where persons are wont to sit sometimes on their way to the summit.
Should we compare these ancient descriptions of the walls, we should find them hopelessly conflicting.
It is only from their ruins that we may hope to obtain accurate information of the strongest fortifications in the ancient world.
In the year 562, after a long reign of forty-three years, Nebuchadnezzar died.
Cyrus decided that Babylon must be taken.
In 538 the city fell, and for a time it became the home of the Persian King.
The fall of Babylon with its lofty walls was a most important event in the history of the ancient world.
A great empire which had existed for more than three thousand years was brought to an end.
The old enemies of Babylon rejoiced.
It is a long story. Poets have sung it. Historians have written it. Prophets have preached it. Legends have gathered about it.
Every child knows the story of "the writing of the hand on the wall." It was the night that Babylon fell.
Belshazzar, the King, he was really the King's son, gave a feast to a thousand of his nobles.
High up, where all might see it, the armless hand wrote the King's fate.
Less picturesque than this Hebrew legend is the royal record of Babylon, which fortunately was inscribed upon a clay cylinder from the ruins of the city.
It refers to the death of the King's son, possibly to Belshazzar of the Bible story.
On the fourteenth day Sippar was taken without a battle.
Nabonidus fled.
On the sixteenth day the troops of Cyrus entered Babylon without a battle.
Nabonidus was taken prisoner in Babylon. On the third of Marchesvan Cyrus entered Babylon and proclaimed peace to all the city.
He appointed Gobrias governor of Babylon.
On the night of the eleventh day Gobrias killed the son of the King.
Without a skirmish or a battle, he permitted them to enter Babylon, and, sparing the city, he delivered the King Nabonidus to him.
All the people of Babylon prostrated themselves before him, and, kissing his feet, rejoiced in his sovereignty, while happiness shone on their faces.
The inscription continues: I am Cyrus, king of the world.
When I made my gracious entry into Babylon, with exceeding joy I took up my abode in the royal palace.
My many troops marched peacefully into Babylon.
I gave heed to the needs of Babylon and its cities, and the servitude of the Babylonians, whatever was oppressive, I removed from them.
I quieted their sighings and soothed their sorrows.
A much longer account of the capture of Babylon by Cyrus appears in the writings of Herodotus.
Though Herodotus wrote nearly a hundred years after Babylon fell, his story seems to bear the stamp of truth.
Cyrus, with the first approach of the ensuing spring, marched forward against Babylon.
The Babylonians, encamped without their walls, awaited his coming.
Cyrus was now reduced to great perplexity, as time went on and he made no progress against the place.
In this distress either someone made this suggestion to him, or he bethought himself of a plan which he proceeded to put in execution.
But, as it was, the Persians came upon them by surprise and so took the city.
Such, then, were the circumstances of the first taking of Babylon.
When Cyrus took Babylon, little or no force was employed.
Only the King's son, Belshazzar, was killed.
The city was spared; the great walls were left standing; the daily sacrifices were continued in the temples, and Cyrus made his home in the royal palace.
The people, enjoying the greater freedom which Cyrus permitted them, were contented, and life in Babylon went on about as before.
In 529 Cyrus died.
Then the Babylonians secretly plotted to throw off the Persian yoke.
That same year, when Darius Hystaspes came to the Persian throne, the Babylonians openly rebelled.
The women chosen were kept to make bread for the men; while the others were strangled that they might not consume the stores.
The Babylonians, however, cared not a whit for his siege.
Mounting upon the battlements that crowned their walls, they insulted and jeered at Darius and his mighty host.
This was said by a Babylonian who thought that a mule would never foal.
Now when a year and seven months had passed, Darius and his army were quite wearied out, finding that they could not anyhow take the city.
The Babylonians were ever upon the watch, and he found no way of conquering them.
One of his sumpter-mules gave birth to a foal.
As soon therefore as he felt within himself that Babylon was fated to be taken, he went to Darius and asked him if he set a very high value on its conquest.
When he found that Darius did indeed value it highly, he considered further with himself how he might make the deed his own, and be the man to take Babylon.
Noble exploits in Persia are ever highly honored and bring their authors to greatness.
To do this seeming to him a light matter, he mutilated himself in a way that was utterly without remedy.
Surely thou hadst gone out of thy mind when thou didst so misuse thyself.
Now, therefore, if there be no failure on thy part, we shall take Babylon.
I will desert to the enemy as I am, and when I get into their city I will tell them that it is by thee that I have been thus treated.
Let neither these nor the former troops be armed with any weapons but their swords those thou mayest leave them.
Having left these instructions, Zopyrus fled towards the gates of the town, often looking back, to give himself the air of a deserter.
He replied that he was Zopyrus, and deserted to them from the Persians.
Then the doorkeepers, when they heard this, carried him at once before the Magistrates.
Darius had maltreated him in the way they could see, only because he had given advice that the siege should be raised, since there seemed no hope of taking the city.
Verily he by whom I have been so mutilated shall not escape unpunished. And truly all the paths of his counsels are known to me.
Thus did Zopyrus speak.
Then the Babylonians, seeing that his deeds were as brave as his words, were beyond measure pleased, and set no bounds to their trust.
After this second exploit, his praise was in all mouths.
Thus was Babylon taken for the second time.
He then chose out near three thousand of the leading citizens and caused them to be crucified, while he allowed the remainder still to inhabit the city.
It is from these women that the Babylonians of our times are sprung.
Cyrus had permitted them to stand, and as long as he made Babylon his home, the city was as strongly protected as ever.
Darius, who besieged the rebellious city twice, weakened it by destroying some of its walls.
During the reign of Xerxes again the city rebelled, and in 484 B.C. he captured it, and completely demolished its defenses.
Therefore, to destroy the power of the old capital, he planned to build Seleucia on the Tigris about fifty miles to the east.
The priests' deception was unavailing, and in 275 B.C., the inhabitants of Babylon were transported to Seleucia.
Then the world metropolis, stripped of most of its population, became a mere village.
The poor of the surrounding country occupied its dismantled palaces.
Slowly the few remaining walls fell, and were buried in their own ruins.
So Babylon was buried and forgotten.
But the walls of the old city had not yet served their full purpose.
The Sassanian kings of Persia were fond of hunting, and Babylon, then overgrown with trees, was their game preserve.
The old walls were restored to a height sufficient to prevent the escape of the animals, and among the ruins the kings enjoyed their favorite sport.
When Julian saw this, he caused a large part of the wall to be overthrown, and as the beasts escaped they were shot down by his soldiers.
The walls of Babylon were destined to serve still another purpose.
The spread of Mohammedanism caused new cities to be built, and Babylon was the quarry for their building material.
The walls of Babylon were transformed into the sacred cities of Kerbela and Nejef.
In the eleventh century, on the site of the southern part of Babylon, the city of Hillah was built.
Hillah might be called a child of Babylon, for it is almost entirely constructed with Nebuchadnezzar's bricks.
The walls of the houses are built of them.
The courtyards and streets are paved with them, and as you walk about the city the name of Nebuchadnezzar everywhere meets your eye.
Many of the ten thousand people living in Hillah still gain their livelihood by digging the bricks from the ruins to sell to the modern builders.
The great irrigating dams across the Euphrates are constructed entirely of them.
The people of Hillah, too, are a survival of Babylonian times.
Some are Arabs of the same tribes which used to roam the desert in Nebuchadnezzar's days. Some are the children of the Hebrew exiles of old.
Some, calling themselves Christians, are the descendants of Babylonians, perhaps of Nebuchadnezzar himself.
Among the first of the modern travelers to describe the ruins of Babylon was Anthony Shirley, an Englishman who visited Mesopotamia in 1599.
Among the later visitors to Babylon was the great Niebuhr.
In 1812, James Claudius Rich, the British Resident at Baghdad, made the first complete examination of the ruins.
For fifteen years Dr. Koldewey and his assistants, with a force of two hundred native workmen, have labored there winter and summer.
The excavations have shown that Babylon, as the ancients told us, was nearly square.
The Euphrates flowed through it, but the greater part of the city was on the eastern shore.
Arabs, searching for bricks, have burrowed their way down deep into it, revealing massive walls and arches.
The Germans maintain that it is the ruin of the Tower of Babel.
Here, it has been suggested, were the famous hanging gardens which some ancient authors included among the Seven Wonders of the World.
Deep down in the mound the Germans discovered the palace of Nebuchadnezzar with its hundreds of small chambers and its huge surrounding walls.
The mound still farther south is called Amran, because upon its summit stands the tomb of a Mohammedan saint of that name.
There lie the ruins of the famous temple of Esagil, sacred to Marduk.
Upon the little mound Jumjuma farther on, an Arab village has long stood.
All of the ancient writers agree in saying that Babylon was surrounded with both inner and outer walls, and the ruins confirm their statements.
In places even the bases have disappeared, and their moats have long been filled with the drifting sand.
The outer wall bore the name of Nimitti-Bel. Its direction was northeast and southwest, forming a triangle with the river.
It seems that the circuit of the outer wall was about eleven miles.
The small portions of it which have been excavated suffice to show its construction.
The moat, ten feet deep, and of a width no longer known, ran close to its base. The wall was double.
Its outer part was about twenty-four feet in thickness, and its foundations, as Nebuchadnezzar said, were carried down to the water level.
They were laid in bitumen.
The inner part of the wall was constructed of unburned bricks, and at a distance of about thirty-six feet from the outer part.
This inner part was about twenty-four feet wide, and at intervals of about one hundred and forty feet it was surmounted with towers.
The inner wall of Babylon was called Imgur-Bel, and like the outer wall, it was double.
Time has dealt even less kindly with it, for it may be traced only for the distance of about a mile along its eastern side.
Nebuchadnezzar says that he built it of burned bricks, but only sun-dried bricks laid in mud now appear.
Its outer part, about twelve feet in width, was protected with towers at intervals of sixty-five feet.
A space of about twenty-three feet separated it from its inner part, which was about twenty feet in width.
It too was surmounted with towers.
No traces of its moat have appeared.
The entire width of this inner defense was about fifty-five feet; its height is uncertain.
O Marduk, great god, look joyfully upon the precious work of my hands. Be thou my protector.
Grant me as a gift a life of distant days.
Fortunately its walls have suffered less from the hands of the brick hunters, and the German excavators have been able to reconstruct their plan.
They may best be described by means of the accompanying diagram representing a cross section.
Had the enemy of Babylon succeeded in breaking through the outer and inner defenses of the city the royal palace would have still been far from his reach.
Between the several sections were wide spaces where foot soldiers and charioteers might fight.
We do not know their height, for the statements of the ancient writers disagree.
Ctesias mentions three hundred feet; probably they were not far from the truth.
The ruins reach the height of about forty feet.
Nor were the walls about the palace a great mass of dull brick masonry.
It seems that the bricks of the reliefs were molded and glazed separately and so accurately that when built into the wall they fitted perfectly.
A modern artist would have difficulty in doing such accurate work.
Nebuchadnezzar speaks of great bronze gates and of images of bronze, but none have been discovered.
Probably their metal was far too valuable for the enemy to leave behind.
Should you cross the river to search for the western inner wall, you would find but a small fragment of it.
The great outer wall seems to have disappeared completely beneath the desert surface.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 1.
This chapter describes President Kennedy's trip to Dallas, from its origin through its tragic conclusion.
An evaluation of the procedures employed to safeguard the President, with recommendations for improving these procedures, appears in Chapter 8 of the report.
President Kennedy's visit to Texas in November 1963 had been under consideration for almost a year before it occurred.
He had made only a few brief visits to the State since the 1960 Presidential campaign and in 1962 he began to consider a formal visit.
During 1963, the reasons for making the trip became more persuasive.
As a political leader, the President wished to resolve the factional controversy within the Democratic Party in Texas before the election of 1964.
The party itself saw an opportunity to raise funds by having the President speak at a political dinner eventually planned for Austin.
As Chief of State, the President always welcomed the opportunity to learn, firsthand, about the problems which concerned the American people.
Vice President Johnson, and Governor Connally on June 5th, 1963, at the Cortez Hotel in El Paso, Texas.
The President had spoken earlier that day at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, Colorado.
The three agreed that the President would come to Texas in late November 1963.
The original plan called for the President to spend only 1 day in the State, making whirlwind visits to Dallas, Fort Worth, San Antonio, and Houston.
At the White House, Kenneth O'Donnell, special assistant to the President, acted as coordinator for the trip.
Everyone agreed that, if there was sufficient time, a motorcade through downtown Dallas would be the best way for the people to see their President.
According to O'Donnell, quote, we had a motorcade wherever we went, end quote.
Lawson conferred with the local police and the local office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation about potential dangers to the President.
On November 22 a Secret Service agent stood at the entrance to the Trade Mart, where the President was scheduled to speak, with copies of these photographs.
Dallas detectives in the lobby of the Trade Mart and in the luncheon area also had copies of these photographs.
A number of people who resembled some of those in the photographs were placed under surveillance at the Trade Mart.
The FBI office in Dallas gave the local Secret Service representatives the name of a possibly dangerous individual in the Dallas area who was investigated.
Shortly before, the Dallas police had reported to the Secret Service that the handbill had appeared on the streets of Dallas.
Neither the Dallas police nor the FBI had yet learned the source of the handbill.
An important purpose of the President's visit to Dallas was to speak at a luncheon given by business and civic leaders.
Accordingly, it was important to determine the luncheon site as quickly as possible, so that security could be established at the site and the motorcade route selected.
On November 4, Gerald A. Behn, agent in charge of the White House detail, asked Sorrels to examine three potential sites for the luncheon.
One building, Market Hall, was unavailable for November 22.
On November 4, Sorrels told Behn he believed security difficulties at the Trade Mart could be overcome by special precautions.
Lawson also evaluated the security hazards at the Trade Mart on November 13.
Kenneth O'Donnell made the final decision to hold the luncheon at the Trade Mart; Behn so notified Lawson on November 14.
Once the Trade Mart had been selected, Sorrels and Lawson worked out detailed arrangements for security at the building.
The Motorcade Route.
Lawson was not specifically instructed to select the parade route, but he understood that this was one of his functions.
Even before the Trade Mart had been definitely selected, Lawson and Sorrels began to consider the best motorcade route from Love Field to the Trade Mart.
This route, eventually selected for the motorcade from the airport to the Trade Mart, measured 10 miles and could be driven easily within the allotted 45 minutes.
For the President's return to Love Field following the luncheon, the agents selected the most direct route, which was approximately 4 miles.
Deputy Chief N. T. Fisher, and several other command officers to discuss details of the motorcade and possible routes.
The route was further reviewed by Lawson and Sorrels with Assistant Chief Batchelor and members of the local host committee on November 15.
The police officials agreed that the route recommended by Sorrels was the proper one and did not express a belief that any other route might be better.
Sorrels and Lawson drove over the selected route with Batchelor and other police officers, verifying that it could be traversed within 45 minutes.
Representatives of the local host committee and the White House staff were advised by the Secret Service of the actual route on the afternoon of November 18.
The route impressed the agents as a natural and desirable one.
According to Lawson, the chosen route seemed to be the best.
It afforded us wide streets most of the way, because of the buses that were in the motorcade.
To reach the Trade Mart from Main Street the agents decided to use the Stemmons Freeway (Route No. 77), the most direct route.
The building overlooks Dealey Plaza, an attractively landscaped triangle of 3 acres.
This concrete barrier extends far enough beyond the access road to make it impracticable for vehicles to turn right from Main directly to the access road.
A sign located on this barrier instructs Main Street traffic not to make any turns.
The planning for the motorcade also included advance preparations for security arrangements along the route.
To control traffic, arrangements were made for the deployment of foot patrolmen and motorcycle police at various positions along the route.
Police were assigned to each overpass on the route and instructed to keep them clear of unauthorized persons.
The selection of the Trade Mart as the possible site for the luncheon first appeared in the Dallas Times-Herald on November 15, 1963.
From the airport, the President's party will proceed to Mockingbird Lane to Lemmon and then to Turtle Creek, turning south to Cedar Springs.
Harwood to Main, Main to Houston, Houston to Elm, Elm under the Triple Underpass to Stemmons Freeway, and on to the Trade Mart.
The President's intention to pay a visit to Texas in the fall of 1963 aroused interest throughout the State.
Although there were critical editorials and letters to the editors, the news stories reflected the desire of Dallas officials to welcome the President with dignity and courtesy.
Increased concern about the President's visit was aroused by the incident involving the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai E. Stevenson.
Stevenson was jeered, jostled, and spat upon by hostile demonstrators outside the Dallas Memorial Auditorium Theater.
The local, national, and international reaction to this incident evoked from Dallas officials and newspapers strong condemnations of the demonstrators.
Mayor Earle Cabell called on the city to redeem itself during President Kennedy's visit.
During November the Dallas papers reported frequently on the plans for protecting the President, stressing the thoroughness of the preparations.
They conveyed the pleas of Dallas leaders that citizens not demonstrate or create disturbances during the President's visit.
On November 18 the Dallas City Council adopted a new city ordinance prohibiting interference with attendance at lawful assemblies.
Two days before the President's arrival Chief Curry warned that the Dallas police would not permit improper conduct during the President's visit.
Another reaction to the impending visit -- hostile to the President -- came to a head shortly before his arrival.
On November 21 there appeared on the streets of Dallas the anonymous handbill mentioned above.
It was fashioned after the "wanted" circulars issued by law enforcement agencies.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 2.
They took off in the Presidential plane, Air Force One, at 11 a.m., arriving at San Antonio at 1:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time.
They were greeted by Vice President Johnson and Governor Connally, who joined the Presidential party in a motorcade through San Antonio.
During the afternoon, President Kennedy dedicated the U.S. Air Force School of Aerospace Medicine at Brooks Air Force Base.
At Rice Stadium a very large, enthusiastic crowd greeted the President.
In Houston, as elsewhere during the trip, the crowds showed much interest in Mrs. Kennedy.
Late in the evening, the Presidential party flew to Fort Worth where they spent the night at the Texas Hotel.
On the morning of November 22, President Kennedy attended a breakfast at the hotel and afterward addressed a crowd at an open parking lot.
The President liked outdoor appearances because more people could see and hear him.
Before leaving the hotel, the President, Mrs. Kennedy, and Kenneth O'Donnell talked about the risks inherent in Presidential public appearances.
Upon concluding the conversation, the President prepared to depart for Dallas.
Governor and Mrs. Connally and Senator Ralph W. Yarborough had come with the President from Fort Worth.
President and Mrs. Kennedy walked along a chain-link fence at the reception area greeting a large crowd of spectators that had gathered behind it.
Secret Service agents formed a cordon to keep the press and photographers from impeding their passage and scanned the crowd for threatening movements.
Dallas police stood at intervals along the fence and Dallas plain clothes men mixed in the crowd.
Vice President and Mrs. Johnson followed along the fence, guarded by four members of the Vice-Presidential detail.
Approximately 10 minutes after the arrival at Love Field, the President and Mrs. Kennedy went to the Presidential automobile to begin the motorcade.
Every effort is made to prevent unscheduled stops, although the President may, and in Dallas did, order stops in order to greet the public.
Men the motorcade slows or stops, agents take positions between the President and the crowd.
Motorcycles. -- Dallas police motorcycles preceded the pilot car.
Manned by officers of the Dallas Police Department, this automobile preceded the main party by approximately quarter of a mile.
Its function was to alert police along the route that the motorcade was approaching and to check for signs of trouble.
Motorcycles. -- Next came four to six motorcycle policemen whose main purpose was to keep the crowd back.
The occupants scanned the crowd and the buildings along the route.
Their main function was to spot trouble in advance and to direct any necessary steps to meet the trouble.
Following normal practice, the lead automobile stayed approximately 4 to 5 car lengths ahead of the President's limousine.
The Presidential limousine.
It was outfitted with a clear plastic bubbletop which was neither bulletproof nor bullet resistant.
Because the skies had cleared in Dallas, Lawson directed that the top not be used for the day's activities.
He acted on instructions he had received earlier from Assistant Special Agent in Charge Roy H. Kellerman, who was in Fort Worth with the President.
The President had frequently stated that he did not want agents to ride on these steps during a motorcade except when necessary.
He had repeated this wish only a few days before, during his visit to Tampa, Florida.
President Kennedy rode on the right-hand side of the rear seat with Mrs. Kennedy on his left.
Governor Connally occupied the right jump seat, Mrs. Connally the left.
Motorcycles. -- Four motorcycles, two on each side, flanked the rear of the Presidential car.
They provided some cover for the President, but their main purpose was to keep back the crowd.
On previous occasions, the President had requested that, to the extent possible, these flanking motorcycles keep back from the sides of his car.
Presidential follow-up car.
It carried eight Secret Service agents -- two in the front seat, two in the rear, and two on each of the right and left running boards.
Each agent carried a .38-caliber pistol, and a shotgun and automatic rifle were also available.
Presidential Assistants David F. Powers and Kenneth O'Donnell sat in the right and left jump seats, respectively.
They were instructed to watch particularly for thrown objects, sudden actions in the crowd, and any movements toward the Presidential car.
The two agents on the rear of the running boards were to advance toward the front of the President's car whenever it stopped or slowed down sufficiently for them to do so.
Vice-Presidential car.
This distance was maintained so that spectators would normally turn their gaze from the President's automobile by the time the Vice President came into view.
Vice President Johnson sat on the right-hand side of the rear seat, Mrs. Johnson in the center, and Senator Yarborough on the left.
Vice-Presidential follow-up car.
These agents performed for the Vice President the same functions that the agents in the Presidential follow-up car performed for the President.
Remainder of motorcade.
Police car and motorcycles.
A Dallas police car and several motorcycles at the rear kept the motorcade together and prevented unauthorized vehicles from joining the motorcade.
Communications in the motorcade.
White House communications car, Trade Mart, Love Field, and the Presidential and Vice-Presidential airplanes.
At the President's direction, his automobile stopped twice, the first time to permit him to respond to a sign asking him to shake hands.
On the other occasion, the President halted the motorcade to speak to a Catholic nun and a group of small children.
In the downtown area, large crowds of spectators gave the President a tremendous reception.
Special Agent Glen A. Bennett once left his place inside the follow-up car to help keep the crowd away from the President's car.
When a teenage boy ran toward the rear of the President's car, Ready left the running board to chase the boy back into the crowd.
On several occasions when the Vice President's car was slowed down by the throng, Special Agent Youngblood stepped out to hold the crowd back.
As the motorcade approached the intersection of Houston and Elm Streets, there was general gratification in the Presidential party about the enthusiastic reception.
Mrs. Connally, elated by the reception, turned to President Kennedy and said, quote, Mr. President, you can't say Dallas doesn't love you.
Governor Connally sustained bullet wounds in his back, the right side of his chest, right wrist, and left thigh.
The exact time of the assassination was fixed by the testimony of four witnesses.
William Greer, operator of the Presidential limousine, estimated the car's speed at the time of the first shot as 12 to 15 miles per hour.
Other witnesses in the motorcade estimated the speed of the President's limousine from 7 to 22 miles per hour.
A more precise determination has been made from motion pictures taken on the scene by an amateur photographer, Abraham Zapruder.
Based on these films, the speed of the President's automobile is computed at an average speed of 11.2 miles per hour.
The car maintained this average speed over a distance of approximately 186 feet immediately preceding the shot which struck the President in the head.
While the car traveled this distance, the Zapruder camera ran 152 frames.
This represents a speed of 11.2 miles per hour.
Mrs. John F. Kennedy, on the left of the rear seat of the limousine, looked toward her left and waved to the crowds along the route.
On turning she saw a quizzical look on her husband's face as he raised his left hand to his throat.
Mrs. Kennedy then heard a second shot and saw the President's skull torn open under the impact of the bullet.
Oh, my God, they have shot my husband. I love you, Jack.
In his testimony before the Commission, Governor Connally was certain that he was hit by the second shot, which he stated he did not hear.
Mrs. Connally, too, heard a frightening noise from her right.
Looking over her right shoulder, she saw that the President had both hands at his neck but she observed no blood and heard nothing.
She watched as he slumped down with an empty expression on his face.
Roy Kellerman, in the right front seat of the limousine, heard a report like a firecracker pop.
The driver, William Greer, heard a noise which he took to be a backfire from one of the motorcycles flanking the Presidential car.
When he heard the same noise again, Greer glanced over his shoulder and saw Governor Connally fall.
As he issued his instructions to Greer and to the lead car, Kellerman heard a flurry of shots within 5 seconds of the first noise.
Kellerman saw Governor Connally in his wife's lap and Special Agent Clinton J. Hill lying across the trunk of the car.
Mrs. Connally heard a second shot fired and pulled her husband down into her lap.
Observing his blood-covered chest as he was pulled into his wife's lap, Governor Connally believed himself mortally wounded.
The Governor was lying with his head on his wife's lap when he heard a shot hit the President.
At that point, both Governor and Mrs. Connally observed brain tissue splattered over the interior of the car.
According to Governor and Mrs. Connally, it was after this shot that Kellerman issued his emergency instructions and the car accelerated.
Special Agent Hill was scanning the few people standing on the south side of Elm Street after the motorcade had turned off Houston Street.
Hill heard a noise, which seemed to be a firecracker, coming from his right rear.
Hill jumped from the follow-up car and ran to the President's automobile.
Hill heard a second shot, proximately 5 seconds after the first, which removed a portion of the President's head.
She turned toward me and I grabbed her and put her back in the back seat, crawled up on top of the back seat and lay there.
Mrs. Kennedy had no recollection of climbing onto the back of the car.
Most of the other Secret Service agents in the motorcade had drawn their sidearms.
As we were beginning to go down this incline, all of a sudden there was an explosive noise.
I quickly observed unnatural movement of crowds, like ducking or scattering, and quick movements in the Presidential follow-up car.
I was pushed down by Agent Youngblood.
Almost in the same moment in which he hit or pushed me, he vaulted over the back seat and sat on me.
Other Secret Service agents assigned to the motorcade remained at their posts during the race to the hospital.
None stayed at the scene of the shooting, and none entered the Texas School Book Depository Building at or immediately after the shooting.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 2. The Assassination: Part 3.
Chief of Police Curry and police motorcyclists at the head of the motorcade led the way to the hospital.
Meanwhile, Chief Curry ordered the police base station to notify Parkland Hospital that the wounded President was en route.
Arriving almost simultaneously were the President's follow-up car, the Vice President's automobile, and the Vice President's follow-up car.
Admiral Burkley, the President's physician, arrived at the hospital, quote, between 3 and 5 minutes following the arrival of the President, end quote.
When Parkland Hospital received the notification, the staff in the emergency area was alerted and trauma rooms 1 and 2 were prepared.
Dr. Fouad A. Bashour.
Lawson jumped from the lead car and rushed into the emergency entrance, where he was met by hospital staff members wheeling stretchers out to the automobile.
Special Agent Hill removed his suit jacket and covered the President's head and upper chest to prevent the taking of photographs.
Governor Connally, who had lost consciousness on the ride to the hospital, regained consciousness when the limousine stopped abruptly at the emergency entrance.
Despite his serious wounds, Governor Connally tried to get out of the way so that medical help could reach the President.
Although he was reclining in his wife's arms, he lurched forward in an effort to stand upright and get out of the car, but he collapsed again.
Then he experienced his first sensation of pain, which became excruciating.
The Governor was lifted onto a stretcher and taken into trauma room 2.
The first physician to see the President at Parkland Hospital was Dr. Charles J. Carrico, a resident in general surgery.
Dr. Carrico was in the emergency area, examining another patient, when he was notified that President Kennedy was en route to the hospital.
Approximately 2 minutes later, Dr. Carrico saw the President on his back, being wheeled into the emergency area.
On the basis of these findings, Dr. Carrico concluded that President Kennedy was still alive.
Dr. Carrico felt the President's back and determined that there was no large wound there which would be an immediate threat to life.
Observing the serious problems presented by the head wound and inadequate respiration, Dr. Carrico directed his attention to improving the President's breathing.
Dr. Carrico inserted a cuffed endotracheal tube past the injury, inflated the cuff, and connected it to a Bennett machine to assist in respiration.
At that point, direction of the President's treatment was undertaken by Dr. Malcolm O. Perry, who arrived at trauma room 1 a few moments after the President.
Dr. Perry noted the President's back brace as he felt for a femoral pulse, which he did not find.
Observing that an effective airway had to be established if treatment was to be effective, Dr. Perry performed a tracheotomy, which required 3 to 5 minutes.
Dr. Carrico treated the President's known ad-renal insufficiency by administering hydrocortisone.
Dr. Robert N. McClelland entered at that point and assisted Dr. Perry with the tracheotomy.
When Dr. Perry noted free air and blood in the President's chest cavity, he asked that chest tubes be inserted to allow for drainage of blood and air.
Drs. Paul C. Peters and Charles R. Baxter initiated these procedures.
A femoral pulse was also detected in the President's leg.
Dr. Clark noted some electrical activity on the cardiotachyscope attached to monitor the President's heart responses.
Dr. Clark did not see any other hole or wound on the President's head.
In the absence of any neurological, muscular, or heart response, the doctors concluded that efforts to revive the President were hopeless.
At approximately 1 p.m., after last rites were administered to the President by Father Oscar L. Huber, Dr. Clark pronounced the President dead.
He made the official determination because the ultimate cause of death, the severe head injury, was within his sphere of specialization.
The time was fixed at 1 p.m., as an approximation, since it was impossible to determine the precise moment when life left the President.
President Kennedy could have survived the neck injury, but the head wound was fatal.
But his condition was hopeless, and the extraordinary efforts of the doctors to save him could not help but to have been unavailing.
A thorough inspection would have involved washing and cleansing the back, and this is not practical in treating an acutely injured patient.
You have to determine which things, which are immediately life threatening and cope with them, before attempting to evaluate the full extent of the injuries.
Before this was accomplished the President's cardiac activity had ceased and closed cardiac massage was instituted, which made it impossible to inspect his back.
Question: Was any effort made to inspect the President's back after he had expired? Answer: No, sir.
I suppose nobody really had the heart to do it.
Moreover, the Parkland doctors took no further action after the President had expired because they concluded that it was beyond the scope of their permissible duties.
While one medical team tried to revive President Kennedy, a second performed a series of operations on the bullet wounds sustained by Governor Connally.
Governor Connally was originally seen by Dr. Carrico and Dr. Richard Dulany.
While Dr. Carrico went on to attend the President, Dr. Dulany stayed with the Governor and was soon joined by several other doctors.
Governor Connally had a large sucking wound in the front of the right chest which caused extreme pain and difficulty in breathing.
Rubber tubes were inserted between the second and third ribs to reexpand the right lung, which had collapsed because of the opening in the chest wall.
This operation was concluded at 3:20 p.m.
Two additional operations were performed on Governor Connally for wounds which he had not realized he had sustained until he regained consciousness the following day.
The wound on the back of the wrist was left partially open for draining, and the wound on the palm side was enlarged, cleansed, and closed.
The fracture was set, and a cast was applied with some traction utilized.
The agents moved a nurse and patient out of a nearby room, lowered the shades, and took emergency security measures to protect the Vice President.
Two men from the President's follow-up car were detailed to help protect the Vice President.
An agent was stationed at the entrance to stop anyone who was not a member of the Presidential party.
Jack Brooks, Homer Thornberry, and Albert Thomas joined Clifton C. Carter and the group of special agents protecting the Vice President.
On one occasion Mrs. Johnson, accompanied by two Secret Service agents, left the room to see Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Connally.
Concern that the Vice President might also be a target for assassination prompted the Secret Service agents to urge him to leave the hospital and return to Washington immediately.
The Vice President decided to wait until he received definitive word of the President's condition.
At approximately 1:20 p.m., Vice President Johnson was notified by O'Donnell that President Kennedy was dead.
When consulted by the Vice President, O'Donnell advised him to go to the airfield immediately and return to Washington.
It was decided that the Vice President should return on the Presidential plane rather than on the Vice-Presidential plane because it had better communication equipment.
When told that Mrs. Kennedy refused to leave without the President's body, the Vice President said that he would not leave Dallas without her.
Immediately after President Kennedy's stretcher was wheeled into trauma room 1, Secret Service agents took positions at the door of the small emergency room.
A nurse was asked to identify hospital personnel and to tell everyone, except necessary medical staff members, to leave the emergency room.
Other Secret Service agents posted themselves in the corridors and other areas near the emergency room.
Special Agent Lawson made certain that the Dallas police kept the public and press away from the immediate area of the hospital.
Agents Kellerman and Hill telephoned the head of the White House detail, Gerald A. Behn, to advise him of the assassination.
The telephone line to Washington was kept open throughout the remainder of the stay at the hospital.
Secret Service agents stationed at later stops on the President's itinerary of November 22 were redeployed.
Men at the Trade Mart were driven to Parkland Hospital in Dallas police cars.
The Secret Service group awaiting the President in Austin were instructed to return to Washington.
Meanwhile, the Secret Service agents in charge of security at Love Field started to make arrangements for departure.
The police were cautioned to prevent picture taking.
When security arrangements at the airport were complete, the Secret Service made the necessary arrangements for the Vice President to leave the hospital.
Unmarked police cars took the Vice President and Mrs. Johnson from Parkland Hospital to Love Field.
Chief Curry drove one automobile occupied by Vice President Johnson, U.S. Representatives Thomas and Thornberry, and Special Agent Youngblood.
In another car Mrs. Johnson was driven to the airport accompanied by Secret Service agents and Representative Brooks.
Motorcade policemen who escorted the automobiles were requested by the Vice President and Agent Youngblood not to use sirens.
During the drive Vice President Johnson, at Youngblood's instruction, kept below window level.
Mrs. Kennedy alternated between watching them and waiting outside.
O'Donnell tried to persuade Mrs. Kennedy to leave the area, but she refused.
A casket was obtained and the President's body was prepared for removal.
Despite the protests of these officials, the casket was wheeled out of the hospital, placed in an ambulance, and transported to the airport shortly after 2 p.m.
Concerned that the local officials might try to prevent the plane's departure, O'Donnell asked that the pilot take off immediately.
He was informed that takeoff would be delayed until Vice President Johnson was sworn in.
Federal Judge Sarah T. Hughes hastened to the plane to administer the oath.
Members of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential parties filled the central compartment of the plane to witness the swearing in.
At 2:38 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, Lyndon Baines Johnson took the oath of office as the 36th President of the United States.
Mrs. Kennedy and Mrs. Johnson stood at the side of the new President as he took the oath of office.
Nine minutes later, the Presidential airplane departed for Washington, D.C.
Return to Washington, D.C.
On the return flight, Mrs. Kennedy sat with David Powers, Kenneth O'Donnell, and Lawrence O'Brien.
Air Force One landed at Andrews Air Force Base, where President Kennedy had begun his last trip only 31 hours before.
Detailed security arrangements had been made by radio from the President's plane on the return flight.
The public had been excluded from the base, and only Government officials and the press were permitted near the landing area.
Upon arrival, President Johnson made a brief statement over television and radio.
President and Mrs. Johnson were flown by helicopter to the White House, from where Mrs. Johnson was driven to her residence under Secret Service escort.
The President then walked to the Executive Office Building, where he worked until 9 p.m.
Mrs. Kennedy chose the hospital in Bethesda for the autopsy because the President had served in the Navy.
On the 17th floor of the Hospital, Mrs. Kennedy and the Attorney General joined other members of the Kennedy family to await the conclusion of the autopsy.
Mrs. Kennedy was guarded by Secret Service agents in quarters assigned to her in the naval hospital.
The Secret Service established a communication system with the White House and screened all telephone calls and visitors.
The hospital received the President's body for autopsy at approximately 7:35 p.m.
X-rays and photographs were taken preliminarily and the pathological examination began at about 8 p.m.
The body was muscular and well developed with no gross skeletal abnormalities except for those caused by the gunshot wounds.
The autopsy examination revealed two wounds in the President's head.
During the autopsy examination, Federal agents brought the surgeons three pieces of bone recovered from Elm Street and the Presidential automobile.
When put together, these fragments accounted for approximately three-quarters of the missing portion of the skull.
From this head wound two small irregularly shaped fragments of metal were recovered and turned over to the FBI.
The autopsy also disclosed a wound near the base of the back of President Kennedy's neck slightly to the right of his spine.
The nature and characteristics of this neck wound are discussed fully in the next chapter.
After the autopsy was concluded at approximately 11 p.m., the President's body was prepared for burial.
This was finished at approximately 4 a.m.
Shortly thereafter, the President's wife, family and aides left Bethesda Naval Hospital.
The President's body was taken to the East Room of the White House where it was placed under ceremonial military guard.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 1.
In this chapter the Commission evaluates the evidence upon which it has based its conclusion concerning the identity of the assassin.
After searching their records from 10 p.m. to 4 a.m.
Post Office Box 2915, Dallas, Texas, on March 20, 1963.
It was sent in an envelope bearing the same name and return address in handwriting.
The canceled money order was obtained from the Post Office Department.
These words were also in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald.
From Klein's records it was possible to trace the processing of the order after its receipt.
This price included $19.95 for the rifle and the scope, and $1.50 for postage and handling.
The rifle without the scope cost only $12.78.
The specific rifle shipped against the order had been received by Klein's from Crescent on February 21, 1963.
It bore the manufacturer's serial number C2766.
On that date, Klein's placed an internal control number VC836 on this rifle.
Since the rifle was shipped from Chicago on March 20, 1963, it was received in Dallas during the period when Oswald rented and used the box.
It is not known whether the application for post office box 2915 listed "A. Hidell" as a person entitled to receive mail at this box.
The person having access to the box then takes the notice to the window and is given the package.
Ordinarily, Inspector Holmes testified, identification is not requested because it is assumed that the person with the notice is entitled to the package.
Oswald's use of the name "Hidell" to purchase the assassination weapon was one of several instances in which he used this name as an alias.
Handwriting experts from the FBI and the Treasury Department testified that the writing on the mail-order form was that of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Hidell signature on the notice of classification was in the handwriting of Oswald.
It certified that Lee Harvey Oswald had been vaccinated for smallpox on June 8, 1963.
This, too, was a forgery. The signature of "A. J. Hideel" was in the handwriting of Lee Harvey Oswald.
There is no "Dr. Hideel" licensed to practice medicine in Louisiana.
Expert testimony confirmed that the writing on this application was that of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The name "Hidell" was stamped on some of the "Chapter's" printed literature and on the membership application blanks.
Oswald listed a "Sgt. Robert Hidell" as a reference on one job application and "George Hidell" as a reference on another.
Both names were found to be fictitious.
Moreover, the use of "Alek" as a first name for Hidell is a further link to Oswald because "Alek" was Oswald's nickname in Russia.
Letters received by Marina Oswald from her husband signed "Alek" were given to the Commission.
Based on the above evidence, the Commission concluded that Oswald purchased the rifle found on the sixth floor of the Depository Building.
Additional evidence of ownership was provided in the form of palmprint identification which indicated that Oswald had possession of the rifle he had purchased.
He lifted the rifle by the wooden stock after his examination convinced him that the wood was too rough to take fingerprints.
Day continued to examine the rifle with the magnifying glass, looking for possible fingerprints.
He applied fingerprint powder to the side of the metal housing near the trigger, and noticed traces of two prints.
In his testimony before the Commission, Latona stated that when he received the rifle, the area where prints were visible was protected by cellophane.
Accordingly, my opinion simply was that the latent prints which were there were of no value, end quote.
Latona then processed the complete weapon but developed no identifiable prints.
He stated that the poor quality of the wood and the metal would cause the rifle to absorb moisture from the skin, thereby making a clear print unlikely.
In this way the powdered impression is actually removed from the object.
The lifting had been so complete in this case that there was no trace of the print on the rifle itself when it was examined by Latona.
Nor was there any indication that the lift had been performed.
Latona testified that this palmprint was the right palmprint of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Latona's findings were also confirmed by Ronald G. Wittmus, another FBI fingerprint expert.
In the opinion of these experts, it was not possible to estimate the time which elapsed between the placing of the print on the rifle and the date of the lift.
Experts testifying before the Commission agreed that palmprints are as unique as fingerprints for purposes of establishing identification.
Oswald's palmprint on the underside of the barrel demonstrates that he handled the rifle when it was disassembled.
A palmprint could not be placed on this portion of the rifle, when assembled, because the wooden foregrip covers the barrel at this point.
The print is additional proof that the rifle was in Oswald's possession.
He compared them with the fibers found in the shirt which Oswald was wearing when arrested in the Texas Theatre.
This shirt was also composed of dark blue, gray- black and orange-yellow cotton fibers.
Stombaugh testified that the colors, shades, and twist of the fibers found in the tuft on the rifle matched those in Oswald's shirt.
Judgments as to probability will depend on the number and types of matches.
He concluded, quote, There is no doubt in my mind that these fibers could have come from this shirt.
Marina Oswald testified that she thought her husband wore this shirt to work on that day.
Moreover, the bus transfer which he obtained as he left the bus was still in the pocket when he was arrested.
The relative freshness of the fibers is strong evidence that they were caught on the rifle on the morning of the assassination or during the preceding evening.
For 10 days prior to the eve of the assassination Oswald had not been present at Ruth Paine's house in Irving, Texas, where the rifle was kept.
The rifle used in the assassination probably had been wrapped in a blanket for about 8 weeks prior to November 22.
The Commission was able to conclude, however, that the fibers most probably came from Oswald's shirt.
This adds to the conviction of the Commission that Oswald owned and handled the weapon used in the assassination.
He found, quote, one notch in the stock at this point that appears very faintly in the photograph, end quote.
Commission Exhibit No. 133-B, to Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera, with which Marina Oswald testified she took the pictures.
The negative of that picture, Commission Exhibit No. 133-B, was found among Oswald's possessions.
Shaneyfelt compared this negative with a negative which he made by taking a new picture with Oswald's camera.
He concluded that the negative of Exhibit No. 133-B was exposed in Oswald's Imperial Reflex camera to the exclusion of all other cameras.
He could not test Exhibit No. 133-A in the same way because the negative was never recovered.
Both pictures, however, have identical backgrounds and lighting and, judging from the shadows, were taken at the same angle.
They are photographs of the same scene.
The Commission sought to determine whether these photographs were touched prior to publication.
Shaneyfelt testified that the published photographs appeared to be based on a copy of the original which the publications had each retouched differently.
Several of the publications furnished the Commission with the prints they had used, or described by correspondence the retouching they had done.
The rifle was shipped from Klein's in Chicago on March 20, 1963, at a time when the Oswalds were living on Neely Street.
From an examination of one of the photographs, the Commission determined the dates of the issues of the Militant and the Worker which Oswald was holding in his hand.
Moreover, it was the only rifle owned by her husband following his return from the Soviet Union in June 1962.
Oswald loaded their possessions into a station wagon owned by Ruth Paine, who had invited Marina Oswald and the baby to live at her home in Irving, Texas.
Marina Oswald has stated that the rifle was among these possessions, although Ruth Paine testified that she was not aware of it.
Marina Oswald was looking in the garage for parts to the baby's crib and thought that the parts might be in the blanket.
When she started to open the blanket, she saw the stock of the rifle.
Ruth and Michael Paine both noticed the rolled-up blanket in the garage during the time that Marina Oswald was living in their home.
On several occasions, Michael Paine moved the blanket in the garage.
He thought it contained tent poles, or possibly other camping equipment such as a folding shovel.
Each man testified that he thought he could detect the outline of a rifle in the blanket, even though the blanket was empty.
This bulge was apparently caused by a hard protruding object which had stretched the blanket's fibers.
It could have been caused by the telescopic sight of the rifle which was approximately 11 inches long.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 2.
The rifle in the building.
Oswald generally would go to Irving on Friday afternoon and return to Dallas Monday morning.
During the morning of November 21, Oswald asked Frazier whether he could ride home with him that afternoon.
Frazier, surprised, asked him why he was going to Irving on Thursday night rather than Friday.
Oswald replied, quote, I'm going home to get some curtain rods to put in an apartment, end quote.
The two men left work at 4:40 p.m. and drove to Irving.
There was little conversation between them on the way home.
Mrs. Linnie Mae Randle, Frazier's sister, commented to her brother about Oswald's unusual midweek return to Irving.
Frazier told her that Oswald had come home to get curtain rods.
It would appear, however, that obtaining curtain rods was not the purpose of Oswald's trip to Irving on November 21.
No curtain rods were known to have been discovered in the Depository Building after the assassination.
Before dinner on November 21, Oswald played on the lawn of the Paines' home with his daughter June.
After dinner Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald were busy cleaning house and preparing their children for bed.
Between the hours of 8 and 9 p.m. they were occupied with the children in the bedrooms located at the extreme east end of the house.
On the west end of the house is the attached garage, which can be reached from the kitchen or from the outside.
In the garage were the personal belongings of the Oswald family including, as the evidence has shown, the rifle wrapped in the old brown and green blanket.
Mrs. Paine was certain that she had not left the light on in the garage after dinner.
Marina Oswald testified that it was between 9 and 10 p.m.
Neither Marina Oswald nor Ruth Paine saw Oswald in the garage.
The period between 8 and 9 p.m., however, provided ample opportunity for Oswald to prepare the rifle for his departure the next morning.
Only if disassembled could the rifle fit into the paper bag found near the window from which the shots were fired.
On the day of the assassination, Marina Oswald was watching television when she learned of the shooting.
A short time later Mrs. Paine told her that someone had shot the President, quote, from the building in which Lee is working, end quote.
Marina Oswald testified that at that time, quote, My heart dropped.
I then went to the garage to see whether the rifle was there and I saw that the blanket was still there and I said Thank God, end quote.
She did not unroll the blanket. She saw that it was in its usual position and it appeared to her to have something inside.
Soon afterward, at about 3 p.m., police officers arrived and searched the house.
Mrs. Paine pointed out that most of the Oswalds' possessions were in the garage.
With Ruth Paine acting as an interpreter, Detective Rose asked Marina whether her husband had a rifle.
She pointed to the blanket which was on the floor very close to where Ruth Paine was standing.
And she indicated to me that she had peered into this roll and saw a portion of what she took to be a gun she knew her husband to have, a rifle.
And I then translated this to the officers that she knew that her husband had a gun that he had stored in here.
I then stepped off of it and the officer picked it up in the middle and it bent so.
Mrs. Paine had the actual blanket before her as she testified and she indicated that the blanket hung limp in the officer's hand.
Marina Oswald testified that this was her first knowledge that the rifle was not in its accustomed place.
Lee Harvey Oswald left the Paine house in Irving at approximately 7:15 a.m., while Marina Oswald was still in bed.
He carried a, quote, heavy brown bag, end quote.
Oswald gripped the bag in his right hand near the top, quote, It tapered like this as he hugged it in his hand.
It was more bulky toward the bottom, end quote, than toward the top.
She then opened the kitchen door and saw Oswald open the right rear door of her brother's car and place the package in the back of the car.
Mrs. Randle estimated that the package was approximately 28 inches long and about 8 inches wide.
She thought that its color was similar to that of the bag found on the sixth floor of the School Book Depository after the assassination.
Frazier met Oswald at the kitchen door and together they walked to the car.
After entering the car, Frazier glanced over his shoulder and noticed a brown paper package on the back seat.
He asked, quote, What's the package, Lee? End quote. Oswald replied, quote, curtain rods, end quote.
Frazier estimated that the bag was 2 feet long, quote, give and take a few inches, end quote, and about 5 or 6 inches wide.
As they sat in the car, Frazier asked Oswald where his lunch was, and Oswald replied that he was going to buy his lunch that day.
Frazier testified that Oswald carried no lunch bag that day.
Frazier parked the car in the company parking lot about 2 blocks north of the Depository Building.
Oswald left the car first, picked up the brown paper bag, and proceeded toward the building ahead of Frazier.
Frazier walked behind and as they crossed the railroad tracks he watched the switching of the cars.
When Oswald entered the rear door of the Depository Building, he was about 50 feet ahead of Frazier.
It was the first time that Oswald had not walked with Frazier from the parking lot to the building entrance.
When Frazier entered the building, he did not see Oswald.
No other employee has been found who saw Oswald enter that morning.
The bag found on the sixth floor was 88 inches long.
Frazier placed the upper part of the package under his armpit and attempted to cup his right hand beneath the bottom of the bag.
The disassembled rifle was too long to be carried in this manner.
Similarly, when the butt of the rifle was placed in Frazier's hand, it extended above his shoulder to ear level.
The distance between the point on the seat and the door was 27 inches.
And she folded the bag to length of about 28 and a half inches.
Frazier could easily have been mistaken when he stated that Oswald held the bottom of the bag cupped in his hand with the upper end tucked into his armpit.
A handmade bag of wrapping paper and tape was found in the southeast corner of the sixth floor alongside the window from which the shots were fired.
It was not a standard type bag which could be obtained in a store and it was presumably made for a particular purpose.
Oswald's Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, serial No. C2766, which was also found on the sixth floor.
Three cartons had been placed at the window apparently to act as a gun rest and a fourth carton was placed behind those at the window.
The presence of the bag in this corner is cogent evidence that it was used as the container for the rifle.
At the time the bag was found, Lieutenant Day of the Dallas police wrote on it, quote, Found next to the sixth floor window gun fired from.
May have been used to carry gun. Lt. J. C. Day, end quote.
Oswald's fingerprint and palmprint found on bag.
The portion of the palm which was identified was the heel of the right palm, i.e., the area near the wrist, on the little finger side.
Both concluded that the prints were the right palm and left index finger of Lee Oswald. No other identifiable prints were found on the bag.
Oswald's palmprint on the bottom of the paper bag indicated, of course, that he had handled the bag.
Furthermore, it was consistent with the bag having contained a heavy or bulky object when he handled it since a light object is usually held by the fingers.
The palmprint was found on the closed end of the bag.
It was from Oswald's right hand, in which he carried the long package as he walked from Frazier's car to the building.
Materials used to make bag.
James C. Cadigan, a questioned-documents expert with the Bureau, compared the samples with the paper and tape in the actual bag.
In all of the observations and physical tests that I made I found the bag and the paper sample were the same, end quote.
Among other tests, the paper and tape were submitted to fiber analysis and spectrographic examination.
In addition the tape was compared to determine whether the sample tape and the tape on the bag had been taken from the tape dispensing machine at the Depository.
On December 1, 1963, a replica bag was made from materials found on that date in the shipping room.
Cadigan found that the paper used to make this replica sack had different characteristics from the paper in the original bag.
The science of paper analysis enabled him to distinguish between different rolls of paper even though they were produced by the same manufacturer.
The Depository shipping department was on the first floor to which Oswald had access in the normal performance of his duties filling orders.
The blanket in which the rifle was stored was composed of brown and green cotton, viscose and woolen fibers.
The single brown viscose fiber found in the bag matched some of the brown viscose fibers from the blanket in all observable characteristics.
All I would say here is that it is possible that these fibers could have come from this blanket.
We found no brown cotton fibers, no green viscose fibers, and no woolen fibers.
Stombaugh confirmed that the rifle could have picked up fibers from the blanket and transferred them to the paper bag.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 3.
He worked principally on the first and sixth floors of the building, gathering books listed on orders and delivering them to the shipping room on the first floor.
He had ready access to the sixth floor, from the southeast corner window of which the shots were fired.
Atop this carton was a small carton marked "Rolling Readers," measuring approximately 13 by 9 by 8 inches.
In front of this small carton and resting partially on the windowsill was another small "Rolling Readers" carton.
These two small cartons had been moved from a stack about three aisles away.
The boxes in the window appeared to have been arranged as a convenient gun rest.
The cartons were forwarded to the FBI in Washington.
The carton on the windowsill and the large carton below the window contained no prints which could be identified as being those of Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Commission has considered the possibility that the cartons might have been moved in connection with the work that was being performed on the sixth floor on November 22.
Depository employees were laying a new floor at the west end and transferring books from the west to the east end of the building.
The "Rolling Readers" cartons, however, had not been moved by the floor layers and had apparently been taken to the window from their regular position for some particular purpose.
The "Rolling Readers" boxes contained, instead of books, light blocks used as reading aids.
They could be easily adjusted and were still solid enough to serve as a gun rest.
Lieutenant Day of the Dallas police dusted this carton with powder and developed a palmprint on the top edge of the carton on the side nearest the window.
Someone sitting on the box facing the window would have his palm in this position if he placed his hand alongside his right hip.
This print which had been cut out of the box was also forwarded to the FBI and Latona identified it as Oswald's right palmprint.
The print, therefore, could have been placed on the carton at any time within this period.
The freshness of this print could be estimated only because the Dallas police developed it through the use of powder.
Since cartons absorb perspiration, powder can successfully develop a print on such material only within a limited time.
Another expert with the FBI, Ronald G. Wittmus, conducted a separate examination and also agreed with Latona that the prints were Oswald's.
The results of this investigation are fully discussed in chapter 6, page 249.
During the morning of November 22, Givens was working with the floor-laying crew in the southwest section of the sixth floor.
At about 11:45 a.m. the floor-laying crew used both elevators to come down from the sixth floor.
The employees raced the elevators to the first floor. Givens saw Oswald standing at the gate on the fifth floor as the elevator went by.
I discovered I left my cigarettes in my jacket pocket upstairs, and I took the elevator back upstairs to get my jacket with my cigarettes in it, end quote.
He saw Oswald, a clipboard in hand, walking from the southeast corner of the sixth floor toward the elevator.
Givens said to Oswald, quote, Boy are you going downstairs? It's near lunch time, end quote.
Oswald said, quote, No, sir. When you get downstairs, close the gate to the elevator, end quote.
When he reached the first floor, the west elevator -- the one with the gate was not there.
Givens thought this was about 11:55 a.m.
None of the Depository employees is known to have seen Oswald again until after the shooting.
This clipboard had been made by Kaiser and had his name on it.
Kaiser identified it as the clipboard which Oswald had appropriated from him when Oswald came to work at the Depository.
Three invoices on this clipboard, each dated November 22, were for Scott-Foresman books, located on the first and sixth floors.
Oswald had not filled any of the three orders.
The window was approximately 120 feet away.
Brennan saw the man fire the last shot and disappear from the window.
Within minutes of the assassination, Brennan described the man to the police.
Brennan described the man in similar terms, except that he gave the weight as between 165 and 175 pounds and the height was omitted.
Oswald was 5 foot 9 inches, slender and 24 years old.
When arrested, he gave his weight as 140 pounds. On other occasions he gave weights of both 140 and 150 pounds.
The New Orleans police records of his arrest in August of 1963 show a weight of 136 pounds.
The autopsy report indicated an estimated weight of 150 pounds.
Brennan's description should also be compared with the eyewitness description broadcast over the Dallas police radio at 1:22 p.m.
The suspect was described as, quote, a white male about 30, 5 foot 8, black hair, slender, end quote.
As will be discussed fully below, the Commission has concluded that this suspect was Lee Harvey Oswald.
Although Brennan testified that the man in the window was standing when he fired the shots, most probably he was either sitting or kneeling.
The half-open window, the arrangement of the boxes, and the angle of the shots virtually preclude a standing position.
Brennan testified that they were standing, which is their apparent position in the photograph.
From the street, this creates the impression that the person is standing.
Brennan could have seen enough of the body of a kneeling or squatting person to estimate his height.
When the three employees appeared before the Commission, Brennan identified the two whom he saw leave the building.
Brennan had seen Oswald's picture on television, and he told the Commission that whether this affected his identification, quote, is something I do not know.
Brennan stated that he was sure that the person firing the rifle was Oswald.
Brennan stated, quote, I could at that time -- I could, with all sincerity, identify him as being the same man, end quote.
Although the record indicates that Brennan was an accurate observer, he declined to make a positive identification of Oswald when he first saw him in the police lineup.
Brennan described to the police the man he saw in the window and then identified Oswald as the person who most nearly resembled the man he saw.
Lee Harvey Oswald.
Fischer looked up and watched the man in the window for 10 or 15 seconds and then started watching the motorcade, which came into view on Houston Street.
Fischer placed the man in the easternmost window on the south side of the Depository Building on either the fifth or the sixth floor.
The person in the window was a white man and, quote, looked to me like he was looking straight at the Triple Underpass, end quote, down Elm Street.
Boxes and cases were stacked behind him.
Approximately 1 week after the assassination, according to Fisher, policemen showed him a picture of Oswald.
In his testimony he said, quote, I told them that that could have been the man.
That that could have been the man that I saw in the window in the School Book Depository Building, but that I was not sure, end quote.
Fischer described the man's hair as some shade of brown, quote, it wasn't dark, and it wasn't light, end quote.
On November 22, Fischer had apparently described the man as, quote, light-headed, end quote.
Fischer explained that he did not mean by the earlier statement that the man was blond, but rather that his hair was not black.
He said that this was a white man about average in size, quote, possibly thin, end quote, and that he thought the man had light-brown hair.
Fischer and Edwards did not see the man clearly enough or long enough to identify him.
Euins, who was on the southwest corner of Elm and Houston Streets testified that he could not describe the man he saw in the window.
According to Euins, however, as the man lowered his head in order to aim the rifle down Elm Street, he appeared to have a white bald spot, on his head.
Accordingly, Euins' testimony is considered probative as to the source of the shots but is inconclusive as to the identity of the man in the window.
As the motorcade started its descent down Elm Street., Altgens snapped a picture of the Presidential limousine with the entrance to the Depository Building in the background.
Just before snapping the picture Altgens heard a noise which sounded like the popping of a firecracker.
In the background of this picture were several employees watching the parade from the steps of the Depository Building.
One of these employees was alleged to resemble Lee Harvey Oswald.
The Commission has determined that the employee was in fact Billy Lovelady, who identified himself in the picture.
Standing alongside him were Buell Wesley Frazier and William Shelley, who also identified Lovelady.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 4. Oswald's Actions in Building After Assassination.
The encounter in the lunchroom.
The first person to see Oswald after the assassination was Patrolman M. L. Baker of the Dallas Police Department.
Baker was riding a two-wheeled motorcycle behind the last press car of the motorcade.
At about this time he heard the first shot.
He saw pigeons flutter upward. He was not certain, quote, but I am pretty sure they came from the building right on the northwest corner, end quote.
He heard two more shots spaced, quote, pretty well even to me.
As he was parking he noted that people were, quote, falling, and they were rolling around down there grabbing their children, end quote, and rushing about.
A woman screamed, quote, Oh, they have shot that man, they have shot that man, end quote.
Baker, quote, had it in mind that the shots came from the top of this building here, end quote, so he ran straight to the entrance of the Depository Building.
I am a building manager. Follow me, officer, and I will show you, end quote.
Baker and building superintendent Roy Truly went through a second set of doors and stopped at a swinging door where Baker bumped into Truly's back.
Neither elevator was there.
Truly pushed the button for the west elevator which operates automatically if the gate is closed.
When the elevator failed to come, Baker said, quote, let's take the stairs, end quote, and he followed Truly up the stairway, which is to the west of the elevator.
The stairway is located in the northwest corner of the Depository Building.
The stairs from one floor to the next are "L-shaped," with both legs of the "L" approximately the same length.
Because the stairway itself is enclosed, neither Baker nor Truly could see anything on the second-floor hallway until they reached the landing at the top of the stairs.
On the second-floor landing there is a small open area with a door at the east end.
This door leads into a small vestibule, and another door leads from the vestibule into the second-floor lunchroom.
The lunchroom door is usually open, but the first door is kept shut by a closing mechanism on the door.
This vestibule door is solid except for a small glass window in the upper part of the door.
Since the vestibule door is only a few feet from the lunchroom door, the man must have entered the vestibule only a second or two before Baker arrived at the top of the stairwell.
Yet he must have entered the vestibule door before Truly reached the top of the stairwell, since Truly did not see him.
If the man had passed from the vestibule into the lunchroom, Baker could not have seen him.
I can't say whether he had gone on through that door [the lunchroom door] or not.
All I did was catch a glance at him, and evidently he was -- this door might have been, you know, closing and almost shut at that time, end quote.
With his revolver drawn, Baker opened the vestibule door and ran into the vestibule.
He saw a man walking away from him in the lunchroom.
Baker stopped at the door of the lunchroom and commanded, quote, Come here, end quote.
The man turned and walked back toward Baker.
He had been proceeding toward the rear of the lunchroom.
Along a side wall of the lunchroom was a soft drink rending machine, but at that time the man had nothing in his hands.
Meanwhile, Truly had run up several steps toward the third floor.
Missing Baker, he came back to find the officer in the doorway to the lunchroom facing Lee Harvey Oswald.
Baker turned to Truly and said, quote, Do you know this man, does he work here? end quote.
Baker stated later that the man did not seem to be out of breath; he seemed calm. Quote, He never did say a word or nothing.
In fact, he didn't change his expression one bit, end quote.
Truly said of Oswald: quote, He didn't seem to be excited or overly afraid or anything. He might have been a bit startled, like I might have been if somebody confronted me.
But I cannot recall any change in expression of any kind on his face, end quote.
Truly thought that the officer's gun at that time appeared to be almost touching the middle portion of Oswald's body.
Truly also noted at this time that Oswald's hands were empty.
Baker placed himself on a motorcycle about 200 feet from the corner of Elm and Houston Streets where he said he heard the shots.
Truly stood in front of the building.
At a given signal, they reenacted the event. Baker's movements were timed with a stopwatch.
The second test run required 1 minute and 15 seconds.
A test was also conducted to determine the time required to walk from the southeast corner of the sixth floor to the second-floor lunchroom by stairway.
Special Agent John Howlett of the Secret Service carried a rifle from the southeast corner of the sixth floor along the east aisle to the northeast corner.
He placed the rifle on the floor near the site where Oswald's rifle was actually found after the shooting.
Then Howlett walked down the stairway to the second-floor landing and entered the lunchroom.
The second test followed immediately after the first.
The only interval was the time necessary to ride in the elevator from the second to the sixth floor and walk back to the southeast corner.
Howlett was not short winded at the end of either test run.
Baker, not realizing that there were two elevators, thought that only one elevator was in the shaft and that it was two or three floors above the second floor.
Truly and Baker continued up the stairs after the encounter with Oswald in the lunchroom.
There was no elevator on the third or fourth floor.
The east elevator was on the fifth floor when they arrived; the west elevator was not.
They took the east elevator to the seventh floor and ran up a stairway to the roof where they searched for several minutes.
Both Dougherty and Piper were confused witnesses. They had no exact memory of the events of that afternoon.
Truly was probably correct in stating that the west elevator was on the fifth floor when he looked up the elevator shaft from the first floor.
Neither elevator could have been used by Oswald as a means of descent.
Oswald's use of the stairway is consistent with the testimony of other employees in the building.
Harold Norman, and Bonnie Ray Williams -- were watching the parade from the fifth floor, directly below the window from which the shots were fired.
While they were at the west windows their view of the stairwell was completely blocked by shelves and boxes.
Dougherty took the elevator down from the fifth floor after Jarman, Norman, and Williams ran to the west windows and were deciding what to do.
None of these three men saw Dougherty, probably because of the anxiety of the moment and because of the books which may have blocked the view.
Neither Jarman, Norman, Williams, or Dougherty saw Oswald.
When she reached the first floor, she actually saw Shelley and Lovelady slightly east of the east elevator.
Lovelady and Shelley moved out into the street.
Shelley and Lovelady, at a fast walk or trot, turned west into the railroad yards and then to the west side of the Depository Building.
They reentered the building by the rear door several minutes after Baker and Truly rushed through the front entrance.
On entering, Lovelady saw a girl on the first floor who he believes was Victoria Adams.
Oswald's departure from building.
Mrs. Reid had watched the parade from the sidewalk in front of the building with Truly and Mr. O. V. Campbell, vice president of the Depository.
She testified that she heard three shots which she thought came from the building.
She ran inside and up the front stairs into the large open office reserved for clerical employees.
As she approached her desk, she saw Oswald.
As Oswald passed Mrs. Reid she said, quote, Oh, the President has been shot, but maybe they didn't hit him, end quote.
Oswald mumbled something and walked by. She paid no more attention to him.
The only exit from the office in the direction Oswald was moving was through the door to the front stairway.
Mrs. Reid testified that when she saw Oswald, he was wearing a T-shirt and no jacket.
When he left home that morning, Marina Oswald, who was still in bed, suggested that he wear a jacket.
A blue jacket, later identified by Marina Oswald as her husband's, was subsequently found in the building, apparently left behind by Oswald.
Mrs. Reid believes that she returned to her desk from the street about 2 minutes after the shooting.
Reconstructing her movements, Mrs. Reid ran the distance three times and was timed in 2 minutes by stopwatch.
After leaving Mrs. Reid in the front office, Oswald could have gone down the stairs and out the front door by 12:33 p.m.
At that time the building had not yet been sealed off by the police.
He then returned to the corner of Elm and Houston where he met a sergeant who instructed him to find out the name of the building.
Barnett ran to the building, noted its name, and then returned to the corner.
There he was met by a construction worker -- in all likelihood Howard Brennan, who was wearing his work helmet.
The sergeant did the same thing at the rear of the building.
Barnett estimated that approximately 3 minutes elapsed between the time he heard the last of the shots and the time he started guarding the front door.
According to Barnett, quote, there were people going in and out, end quote, during this period.
At that time, Inspector Herbert V. Sawyer's car was parked in front of the building.
Harkness did not know whether or not two officers with Sawyer were guarding the doors.
At 12:34 p.m. Sawyer heard a call over the police radio that the shots had come from the Depository Building.
He then entered the building and took the front passenger elevator as far as it would go -- the fourth floor.
After inspecting this floor, Sawyer returned to the street about 3 minutes after he entered the building.
This was no earlier than 12:37 p.m. and may have been later.
Although Oswald probably left the building at about 12:33 p.m., his absence was not noticed until at least one-half hour later.
Truly, who had returned with Patrolman Baker from the roof, saw the police questioning the warehouse employees.
Approximately 15 men worked in the warehouse and Truly noticed that Oswald was not among those being questioned.
Satisfying himself that Oswald was missing, Truly obtained Oswald's address, phone number, and description from his employment application card.
The address listed was for the Paine home in Irving.
Truly gave this information to Captain Fritz who was on the sixth floor at the time.
Fritz believed that he learned of Oswald's absence after the rifle was found.
The fact that Truly found Fritz in the northwest corner of the floor, near the point where the rifle was found, supports Fritz' recollection.
An eyewitness to the shooting immediately provided a description of the man in the window which was similar to Oswald's actual appearance.
This witness identified Oswald in a lineup as the man most nearly resembling the man he saw and later identified Oswald as the man he observed.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 5.
After leaving the Depository Building at approximately 12:33 p.m., Lee Harvey Oswald proceeded to his roominghouse by bus and taxi.
He arrived at approximately 1 p.m. and left a few minutes later.
At about 1:16 p.m., a Dallas police officer, J. D. Tippit, was shot less than 1 mile from Oswald's roominghouse.
Lee Harvey Oswald left the building approximately 3 minutes after the assassination.
When Oswald was apprehended, a bus transfer marked for the Lakewood-Marsalis route was found in his shirt pocket.
The transfer was dated "Friday November 22, '63" and was punched in two places by the bus driver.
It was the intersection near Lamar Street, it was near Poydras and Lamar Street.
The man was on the bus approximately 4 minutes.
At about 6:30 p.m. on the day of the assassination, McWatters viewed four men in a police lineup.
In his Commission testimony, McWatters said he had been in error and that a teenager named Milton Jones was the passenger he had in mind.
In a later interview, Jones confirmed that he had exchanged words with a woman passenger on the bus during the ride south on Marsalis.
McWatters also remembered that a man received a transfer at Lamar and Elm Streets and that a man in the lineup was about the size of this man.
However, McWatters' recollection alone was too vague to be a basis for placing Oswald on the bus.
Riding on the bus was an elderly woman, Mary Bledsoe, who confirmed the mute evidence of the transfer.
Oswald had rented a room from Mrs. Bledsoe about 6 weeks before, on October 7, but she had asked him to leave at the end of a week.
On November 22, Mrs. Bledsoe came downtown to watch the Presidential motorcade.
And, after we got past Akard, at Murphy -- I figured it out. Let's see. I don't know for sure.
Oswald got on. He looks like a maniac. His sleeve was out here. His shirt was undone.
Was a hole in it, hole, and he was dirty, and I didn't look at him. I didn't want to know I even seen him.
End quote. As Mrs. Bledsoe said these words, she pointed to her right elbow.
When Oswald was arrested in the Texas Theatre, he was wearing a brown sport shirt with a hole in the right sleeve at the elbow.
Mrs. Bledsoe identified the shirt as the one Oswald was wearing and she stated she was certain that it was Oswald who boarded the bus.
Mrs. Bledsoe recalled that Oswald sat halfway to the rear of the bus which moved slowly and intermittently as traffic became heavy.
She heard a passing motorist tell the driver that the President had been shot.
People on the bus began talking about it. As the bus neared Lamar Street, Oswald left the bus and disappeared into the crowd.
Marsalis Street is seven blocks from Beckley.
Oswald lived at 1026 North Beckley.
He could not reach his roominghouse on the Marsalis bus, but the Beckley bus stopped across the street.
According to McWatters, the Beckley bus was behind the Marsalis bus, but he did not actually see it.
Both buses stopped within one block of the Depository Building.
A bus moving through heavy traffic on Elm from Murphy to Lamar was timed at 4 minutes.
The station wagon stopped to pick up the man and then drove off.
The Commission could not accept important elements of Craig's testimony.
Fritz did not bring him into his office to identify Oswald but turned him over to Lieutenant Baker for questioning.
If Craig saw Oswald that afternoon, he saw him through the glass windows of the office.
If Oswald had made such a statement, Captain Fritz and others present would probably have remembered it.
The taxicab ride.
Notified of Whaley's statement, the police brought him to the police station that afternoon.
He was taken to the lineup room where, according to Whaley, five young teenagers, all handcuffed together, were displayed with Oswald.
He testified that Oswald looked older than the other boys.
The police asked him whether he could pick out his passenger from the lineup.
Whaley picked Oswald.
You could have picked him out without identifying him by just listening to him.
Whaley believes that Oswald's conduct did not aid him in his identification, quote, because I knew he was the right one as soon as I saw him.
Whaley's memory of the lineup is inaccurate. There were four men altogether, not six men, in the lineup with Oswald.
Whaley said that Oswald was the man under No. 2.
Actually Oswald was under No. 3.
As he unloaded his Continental bus station passenger in front of Greyhound, he started to get out to buy a package of cigarettes.
He saw a man walking south on Lamar from Commerce.
The man was dressed in faded blue color khaki work clothes, a brown shirt, and some kind of work jacket that almost matched his pants.
The man asked, quote, May I have the cab?, end quote, and got into the front seat.
And he never said anything. So I figured he was one of these people that don't like to talk so I never said any more to him.
But when I got pretty close to 500 block at Neches and North Beckley which is the 500 block, he said, "This will do fine," and I pulled over to the curb right there.
He gave me a dollar bill, the trip was 95 cents.
Whaley was somewhat imprecise as to where he unloaded his passenger.
However, Neches and Beckley do not intersect.
Neches is within one-half block of the roominghouse at 1026 North Beckley where Oswald was living.
The 500 block of North Beckley is five blocks south of the roominghouse.
After a review of these inconsistencies in his testimony before the Commission, Whaley was interviewed again in Dallas.
The route of the taxicab was retraced under the direction of Whaley.
The elapsed time of the reconstructed run from the Greyhound Bus Station to Neely and Beckley was 5 minutes and 30 seconds by stopwatch.
The walk from Beckley and Neely to 1026 North Beckley was timed by Commission counsel at 5 minutes and 45 seconds.
Whaley testified that Oswald was wearing either the gray zippered jacket or the heavy blue jacket.
He was in error, however.
Oswald could not possibly have been wearing the blue jacket during the trip with Whaley, since it was found in the "domino" room of the Depository late in November.
Moreover, Mrs. Bledsoe saw Oswald in the bus without a jacket and wearing a shirt with a hole at the elbow.
On the other hand, Whaley identified Commission Exhibit No. 150 (the shirt taken from Oswald upon arrest) as the shirt his passenger was wearing.
He also stated he saw a silver identification bracelet on his passenger's left wrist.
Oswald was wearing such a bracelet when he was arrested.
On November 22, Oswald told Captain Fritz that he rode a bus to a stop near his home and then walked to his roominghouse.
When queried the following morning concerning a bus transfer found in his possession at the time of his arrest, he admitted receiving it.
And when interrogated about a cab ride, Oswald also admitted that he left the slow-moving bus and took a cab to his roominghouse.
This is the approximate time he entered the roominghouse, according to Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper there.
Arrival and departure from roominghouse.
She first saw him the day he rented a room at that address on October 14, 1963.
He signed his name as O. H. Lee on the roominghouse register.
Mrs. Roberts testified that on Thursday, November 21, Oswald did not come home.
On Friday, November 22, about 1 p.m., he entered the house in unusual haste.
She recalled that it was subsequent to the time the President had been shot.
After a friend had called and told her, "President Kennedy has been shot," she turned on the television.
When Oswald came in she said, quote, Oh, you are in a hurry, end quote, but Oswald did not respond.
He hurried to his room and stayed no longer than 3 or 4 minutes.
Oswald had entered the house in his shirt sleeves, but when he left, he was zipping up a jacket.
Mrs. Roberts saw him a few seconds later standing near the bus stop in front of the house on the east side of Beckley.
Tippit's murder was recorded on the police radio tape at about 1:16 p.m.
Patrolman J. D. Tippit joined the Dallas Police Department in July 1952.
Tippit patroled district No. 78 in the Oak Cliff area of Dallas during daylight hours.
He drove a police car painted distinctive colors with No. 10 prominently displayed on each side.
Tippit rode alone, as only one man was normally assigned to a patrol car in residential areas during daylight shifts.
At 12:45 p.m. the dispatcher ordered No. 78 (Tippit) to, quote, move into central Oak Cliff area, end quote.
At 12:54 p.m., Tippit reported that he was in the central Oak Cliff area at Lancaster and Eighth.
The dispatcher ordered Tippit to be, quote, at large for any emergency that comes in, end quote.
According to Chief Curry, Tippit was free to patrol the central Oak Cliff area.
A similar description was given on channel 2 at 12:45 p.m.
About 100 feet past the intersection Tippit stopped a man walking east along the south side of Patton.
The man's general description was similar to the one broadcast over the police radio.
Tippit stopped the man and called him to his car.
He approached the car and apparently exchanged words with Tippit through the right front or vent window.
As Tippit reached the left front wheel the man pulled out a revolver and fired several shots.
Four bullets hit Tippit and killed him instantly.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 6.
At least 12 persons saw the man with the revolver in the vicinity of the Tippit crime scene at or immediately after the shooting.
By the evening of November 22, five of them had identified Lee Harvey Oswald in police lineups as the man they saw.
A sixth did so the next day.
Three others subsequently identified Oswald from a photograph.
Two witnesses testified that Oswald resembled the man they had seen.
One witness felt he was too distant from the gunman to make a positive identification.
A police car moving east on 10th at about 10 or 12 miles an hour passed in front of his cab.
About 100 feet from the corner the police car pulled up alongside a man on the sidewalk. This man, dressed in a light-colored jacket, approached the car.
Scoggins hurriedly left his seat and hid behind the cab as the man came back toward the corner with gun in hand.
The man cut across the yard through some bushes, passed within 12 feet of Scoggins, and ran south on Patton.
The next day Scoggins viewed a lineup of four persons and identified Oswald as the man whom he had seen the day before at 10th and Patton.
Scoggins stated that he thought he had seen a picture of Oswald in the newspapers prior to the lineup identification on Saturday.
He had not seen Oswald on television and had not been shown any photographs of Oswald by the police.
Another witness, Domingo Benavides, was driving a pickup truck west on 10th Street.
As he crossed the intersection a block east of 10th and Patton, he saw a policeman standing by the left door of the police car parked along the south side of 10th.
Benavides saw a man standing at the right side of the parked police car. He then heard three shots and saw the policeman fall to the ground.
By this time the pickup truck was across the street and about 25 feet from the police car.
Benavides stopped and waited in the truck until the gunman ran to the corner.
He saw him empty the gun and throw the shells into some bushes on the southeast corner lot.
He found two empty shells in the bushes and gave them to Patrolman J. M. Poe who arrived on the scene shortly after the shooting.
Benavides never saw Oswald after the arrest.
When questioned by police officers on the evening of November 22, Benavides told them that he did not think that he could identify the man who fired the shots.
As a result, they did not take him to the police station.
He testified that the picture of Oswald which he saw later on television bore a resemblance to the man who shot Officer Tippit.
Just prior to the shooting, Mrs. Helen Markham, a waitress in downtown Dallas, was about to cross 10th Street at Patton.
As she waited on the northwest corner of the intersection for traffic to pass, she noticed a young man as he was, quote, almost ready to get up on the curb, end quote.
The man continued along 10th Street. Mrs. Markham saw a police car slowly approach the man from the rear and stop alongside of him.
She saw the man come to the right window of the police car. As he talked, he leaned on the ledge of the right window with his arms.
The man appeared to step back as the policeman, quote, calmly opened the car door, end quote, and very slowly got out and walked toward the front of the car.
The man pulled a gun. Mrs. Markham heard three shots and saw the policeman fall to the ground near the left front wheel.
She raised her hands to her eyes as the man started to walk back toward Patton.
He was just fooling with it. I didn't know what he was doing. I was afraid he was fixing to kill me. End quote.
The man, quote, in kind of a little trot, end quote, headed down Patton toward Jefferson Boulevard, a block away.
Mrs. Markham then ran to Officer Tippit's side and saw him lying in a pool of blood.
Helen Markham was screaming as she leaned over the body.
A few minutes later she described the gunman to a policeman.
Her description and that of other eyewitnesses led to the police broadcast at 1:22 p.m.
She identified Lee Harvey Oswald as the man who shot the policeman.
He said that Mrs. Markham started crying when Oswald walked into the lineup room.
That Mrs. Markham described the man who killed Patrolman Tippit as, quote, short, a little on the heavy side, end quote.
The Commission reviewed the transcript of a phone conversation in which Mrs. Markham is alleged to have provided such a description.
During her testimony Mrs. Markham initially denied that she ever had the above phone conversation.
She has subsequently admitted the existence of the conversation and offered an explanation for her denial.
However, even in the absence of Mrs. Markham's testimony, there is ample evidence to identify Oswald as the killer of Tippit.
They ran to the door in time to see a man with a revolver cut across their lawn and disappear around a corner of the house onto Patton.
Barbara Jeanette Davis assumed that he was emptying his gun as, quote, he had it open and was shaking it, end quote. She immediately called the police.
Later in the day each woman found an empty shell on the ground near the house. These two shells were delivered to the police.
Barbara Jeanette and Virginia Davis viewed a group of four men in a lineup and each one picked Oswald as the man who crossed their lawn while emptying his pistol.
Barbara Jeanette Davis testified that no one had shown her a picture of Oswald before the identification and that she had not seen him on television.
She was not sure whether she had seen his picture in a newspaper on the afternoon or evening of November 22 prior to the lineup.
I was pretty sure it was the same man I saw. When they made him turn sideways, I was positive that was the one I seen, end quote.
Similarly, Virginia Davis had not been shown pictures of anyone prior to the lineup and had not seen either television or the newspapers during the afternoon.
Barbara Jeanette Davis and Virginia Davis were sitting alongside each other when they made their positive identifications of Oswald.
Each woman whispered Oswald's number to the detective. Each testified that she was the first to make the identification.
William Arthur Smith was about a block east of 10th and Patton when he heard shots.
He looked west on 10th and saw a man running to the west and a policeman falling to the ground.
Smith failed to make himself known to the police on November 22.
Several days later he reported what he had seen and was questioned by FBI agents.
On television Oswald's hair looked blond, whereas Smith remembered that the man who ran away had hair that was brown or brownish black.
Later, the FBI showed Smith a picture of Oswald. In the picture the hair was brown.
He stated further that from, quote, What I saw of him, end quote, the man looked like the man in the picture.
They heard the sound of shots to the north of their lot. Callaway heard five shots, and Guinyard three.
Both ran to the sidewalk on the east side of Patton at a point about a half a block south of 10th.
They saw a man coming south on Patton with a revolver held high in his right hand. According to Callaway, the man crossed to the west side of Patton.
From across the street Callaway yelled, quote, Hey, man, what the hell is going on? End quote.
He slowed down, halted, said something, and then kept on going to the corner, turned right, and continued west on Jefferson.
Guinyard claimed that the man ran down the east side of Patton and passed within 10 feet of him before crossing to the other side.
Guinyard and Callaway ran to 10th and Patton and found Tippit lying in the street beside his car.
Apparently he had reached for his gun; it lay beneath him outside of the holster.
Callaway picked up the gun.
He and Scoggins attempted to chase down the gunman in Scoggin's taxicab, but he had disappeared.
Guinyard and Callaway viewed the same lineup of four men from which Mrs. Markham had earlier made her identification of Lee Harvey Oswald.
Both men picked Oswald as the man who had run south on Patton with a gun in his hand.
Callaway told the Commission, quote, So they brought four men in.
I stepped to the back of the room, so I could kind of see him from the same distance which I had seen him before. And when he came out I knew him, end quote.
Guinyard said, quote, I told them that was him right there. I pointed him out right there, end quote.
Both Callaway and Guinyard testified that they had not been shown any pictures by the police before the lineup.
The Commission is satisfied that the lineups were conducted fairly.
When the man reached Jefferson, he turned right and headed west.
Reynolds and Patterson decided to follow him.
When he reached a gasoline service station one block away he turned north and walked toward a parking area in the rear of the station.
Neither Reynolds nor Patterson saw the man after he turned off Jefferson at the service station.
These four witnesses were interviewed by FBI agents 2 months after the shooting.
Russell and Patterson were shown a picture of Oswald and they stated that Oswald was the man they saw on November 22, 1963.
Russell confirmed this statement in a sworn affidavit for the Commission.
Patterson, when asked later to confirm his identification by affidavit said he did not recall having been shown the photograph.
He was then shown two photographs of Oswald and he advised that Oswald was, quote, unquestionably, end quote, the man he saw.
L.J. Lewis said in an interview that because of the distance from which he observed the gunman he would hesitate to state whether the man was identical with Oswald.
Two of the arresting officers placed their initials on the weapon and a third inscribed his name.
All three identified Exhibit No. 143 as the revolver taken from Oswald when he was arrested.
Barbara Jeanette Davis, and Virginia Davis.
Cunningham declared that this weapon fired the four cartridges to the exclusion of all other weapons.
Identification was effected through breech face marks and firing pin marks.
He concluded that all of these cartridges were fired from the same weapon.
Cunningham compared four lead bullets recovered from the body of Patrolman Tippit with test bullets fired from Oswald's revolver.
Consecutive bullets fired from the revolver by the FBI experts could not be identified as having been fired from that revolver.
Cunningham testified that all of the bullets were mutilated, one being useless for comparison purposes.
He concluded, however, that he could not say whether the four bullets were fired from the revolver in Oswald's possession.
Nicol differed with the FBI experts on one bullet taken from Tippit's body.
He declared that this bullet was fired from the same weapon that fired the test bullets to the exclusion of all other weapons.
But he agreed that because the other three bullets were mutilated, he could not determine if they had been fired from the same weapon as the test bullets.
Therefore, one cartridge case of this type was not recovered.
And though only one bullet of Remington-Peters manufacture was recovered, two empty cartridge cases of that make were retrieved.
George Rose & Co. had the barrel shortened by a gunsmith to two and one quarter inches.
S T. W. 2 inch BBL, unquote, cost $29.95.
Ten dollars in cash was enclosed.
A. J. Hidell, aged 28, end quote. The date of the order was January 27. No year shown.
Also on the order form was an order, written in ink, for one box of ammunition and one holster, but a line was drawn through these items.
The mail-order form had a line for the name of a witness to attest that the person ordering the gun was a U.S. citizen and had not been convicted of a felony.
The name written in this space was D. F. Drittal.
Heinz W. Michaelis, office manager of both George Rose & Co., Incorporated and Seaport Traders, Incorporated.
The invoice was prepared on March 13, 1963; the revolver was actually shipped on March 20 by Railway Express.
The balance due on the purchase was $19.95.
Marina Oswald gave as her opinion that the mail-order coupon was in Oswald's handwriting.
When shown the revolver, she stated that she recognized it as the one owned by her husband.
Police found an empty revolver holster when they searched Oswald's room on Beckley Avenue after his arrest.
Marina Oswald testified that this was the holster which contained the revolver in the photographs taken on Neely Street.
Approximately 15 minutes before the shooting of Tippit, Oswald was seen leaving his roominghouse.
He was wearing a zipper jacket which he had not been wearing moments before when he had arrived home.
When Oswald was arrested, he did not have a jacket.
Shortly after Tippit was slain, policemen found a light-colored zipper jacket along the route taken by the killer as he attempted to escape.
According to Patrolman Poe this description came from Mrs. Markham and Mrs. Barbara Jeanette Davis.
She last saw him in the parking lot directly behind the service station.
She confirmed this interview by a sworn affidavit.
The suspect last seen running west on Jefferson from 400 East Jefferson.
Police Capt. W. R. Westbrook and several other officers concentrated their search along Jefferson Boulevard.
Westbrook walked through the parking lot behind the service station and found a light-colored jacket lying under the rear of one of the cars.
Westbrook identified Commission Exhibit No. 162 as the light-colored jacket which he discovered underneath the automobile.
This jacket belonged to Lee Harvey Oswald. Marina Oswald stated that her husband owned only two jackets, one blue and the other gray.
The blue jacket was found in the Texas School Book Depository and was identified by Marina Oswald as her husband's.
Marina Oswald also identified Commission Exhibit No. 162, the jacket found by Captain Westbrook, as her husband's second jacket.
The eyewitnesses vary in their identification of the jacket.
It seemed to her that the jacket Oswald wore was darker than Commission Exhibit No. 162.
Mrs. Markham and Barbara Davis thought that the jacket worn by the slayer of Tippit was darker than the jacket found by Westbrook.
Scoggins thought it was lighter.
These facts warrant the finding that Lee Harvey Oswald disposed of his jacket as he fled from the scene of the Tippit killing.
Oswald's jacket was found along the path of flight taken by the gunman as he fled from the scene of the killing.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 7.
One of the persons who heard the sirens was Johnny Calvin Brewer, manager of Hardy's Shoestore, a few doors east of the Texas Theatre.
Brewer knew from radio broadcasts that the President had been shot and that a patrolman had also been shot in Oak Cliff.
When he heard police sirens, he, quote, looked up and saw the man enter the lobby, end quote.
The man wore a T-shirt beneath his outer shirt and he had no jacket.
Brewer said, quote, He just looked funny to me. His hair was sort of messed up and looked like he had been running, and he looked scared, and he looked funny, end quote.
Attracted by the sound of the sirens, Mrs. Postal stepped out of the box office and walked to the curb.
Shortly thereafter, Johnny Brewer, who had come from the nearby shoestore, asked Mrs. Postal whether the fellow that had ducked in had bought a ticket.
She said, quote, No; by golly, he didn't, end quote, and turned around, but the man was nowhere in sight.
Brewer told Mrs. Postal that he had seen the man ducking into his place of business and that he had followed him to the theatre.
I don't know if this is the man they want. But he is running from them for some reason, end quote, She then called the police.
At 1:45 p.m., the police radio stated, quote, Have information a suspect just went in the Texas Theatre on West Jefferson, end quote.
Patrol cars bearing at least 15 officers converged on the Texas Theatre.
Patrolman M. N. McDonald, with Patrolmen R. Hawkins, T. A. Hutson, and C. T. Walker, entered the theatre from the rear.
Other policemen entered the front door and searched the balcony.
Detective Paul L. Bentley rushed to the balcony and told the projectionist to turn up the house lights.
The man was Oswald. He was sitting alone in the rear of the main floor of the theatre near the right center aisle.
About six or seven people were seated on the theatre's main floor and an equal number in the balcony.
McDonald first searched two men in the center of the main floor, about 10 rows from the front.
He walked out of the row up the right center aisle.
When he reached the row where the suspect was sitting, McDonald stopped abruptly and told the man to get on his feet.
Oswald rose from his seat, bringing up both hands.
As McDonald started to search Oswald's waist for a gun, he heard him say, quote, Well, it's all over now, end quote.
Oswald then struck McDonald between the eyes with his left fist; with his right hand he drew a gun from his waist.
McDonald struck back with his right hand and grabbed the gun with his left hand. They both fell into the seats.
Three other officers, moving toward the scuffle, grabbed Oswald from the front, rear and side.
As McDonald fell into the seat with his left hand on the gun, he felt something graze across his hand and heard what sounded like the snap of the hammer.
McDonald felt the pistol scratch his cheek as he wrenched it away from Oswald.
Detective Bob K. Carroll, who was standing beside McDonald, seized the gun from him.
Some of the officers saw Oswald strike McDonald with his fist. Most of them heard a click which they assumed to be a click of the hammer of the revolver.
Testimony of a firearms expert before the Commission established that the hammer of the revolver never touched the shell in the chamber.
George Jefferson Applin, Jr., confirmed that Oswald fought with four or five officers before he was handcuffed.
He added that one officer grabbed the muzzle of a shotgun, drew back, and hit Oswald with the butt end of the gun in the back.
No other theatre patron or officer has testified that Oswald was hit by a gun.
Nor did Oswald ever complain that he was hit with a gun, or injured in the back.
Deputy Sheriff Walthers brought a shotgun into the theatre but laid it on some seats before helping subdue Oswald.
John Gibson, another patron in the theatre, saw an officer grab Oswald, and he claims that he heard the click of a gun misfiring.
He saw no shotgun in the possession of any policeman near Oswald.
He further stated that while fists were flying he heard one of the officers say, quote, Kill the President, will you, end quote.
It is unlikely that any of the police officers referred to Oswald as a suspect in the assassination.
While the police radio had noted the similarity in description of the two suspects, the arresting officers were pursuing Oswald for the murder of Tippit.
At 1:51 p.m., police car 2 reported by radio that it was on the way to headquarters with the suspect.
Captain Fritz returned to police headquarters from the Texas School Book Depository at 2:15 after a brief stop at the sheriff's office.
Fritz replied, quote, Well, he was employed down at the Book Depository and he had not been present for a roll call of the employees, end quote.
Hill said, quote, Captain, we will save you a trip. There he sits, end quote.
Statements of Oswald during Detention.
Throughout this interrogation he denied that he had anything to do either with the assassination of President Kennedy or the murder of Patrolman Tippit.
Captain Fritz of the homicide and robbery bureau did most of the questioning, but he kept no notes and there were no stenographic or tape recordings.
Representatives of other law enforcement agencies were also present, including the FBI and the U.S. Secret Service.
They occasionally participated in the questioning.
The reports prepared by those present at these interviews are set forth in appendix 11.
A full discussion of Oswald's detention and interrogation is presented in chapter 5 of this report.
The results were positive for the hands and negative for the right cheek.
The Commission has, therefore, placed no reliance on the paraffin tests administered by the Dallas police.
Oswald provided little information during his questioning.
Frequently, however, he was confronted with evidence which he could not explain, and he resorted to statements which are known to be lies.
From the outset, Oswald denied owning a rifle.
Oswald said that this was not true. Oswald denied that he had a rifle wrapped up in a blanket in the Paine garage.
Oswald also denied owning a rifle and said that since leaving the Marine Corps he had fired only a small bore 22 rifle.
R. S. Stovall, and G. F. Rose obtained a search warrant and examined Oswald's effects in the Paine garage.
They discovered two photographs, each showing Oswald with a rifle and a pistol.
These photographs were shown to Oswald on the evening of November 23 and again on the morning of the 24th.
Fritz told him that the two small photographs were found in the Paine garage.
At that point, Oswald refused to answer any further questions.
Her testimony was fully supported by a photography expert who testified that in his opinion the pictures were not composites.
At the first interrogation, Oswald claimed that his only crime was carrying a gun and resisting arrest.
When Captain Fritz asked him why he carried the revolver, he answered, quote, Well, you know about a pistol. I just carried it, end quote.
He falsely alleged that he bought the revolver in Fort Worth, when in fact he purchased it from a mail-order house in Los Angeles.
On Sunday morning, November 24, Oswald denied that he knew A. J. Hidell.
Now, I've told you all I'm going to tell you about that card in my billfolds -- you have the card yourself and you know as much about it as I do, end quote.
He also denied that he had received the rifle through this box.
Oswald replied, quote, I don't know anything about that, end quote.
Oswald responded that the landlady simply made a mistake, because he told her that his name was Lee, meaning his first name.
An examination of the roominghouse register revealed that Oswald actually signed the name O. H. Lee.
When asked about the curtain rod story, Oswald lied again.
He denied that he had ever told Frazier that he wanted a ride to Irving to get curtain rods for an apartment.
Actually, the party for one of the Paine's children was the preceding weekend, when Marina Oswald suggested that Oswald remain in Dallas.
When told that Frazier and Mrs. Randle had seen him carrying a long heavy package, Oswald replied, quote, Well, they was mistaken.
Frazier testified before the Commission that Oswald carried no lunch sack that day.
During the first interrogation on November 22, Fritz asked Oswald to account for himself at the time the President was shot.
Oswald told him that he ate lunch in the first-floor lunchroom and then went to the second floor for a Coke which he brought downstairs.
He acknowledged the encounter with the police officer on the second floor.
Oswald told Fritz that after lunch he went outside, talked with Foreman Bill Shelley for 5 or 10 minutes and then left for home.
He said that he left work because Bill Shelley said that there would be no more work done that day in the building.
Shelley denied seeing Oswald after 12 noon or at any time after the shooting.
The next day, Oswald added to his story.
He stated that at the time the President was shot he was having lunch with "Junior" but he did not give Junior's last name.
The only employee at the Depository Building named "Junior" was James Jarman, Jr.
Jarman testified that he ate his lunch on the first floor around 5 minutes to 12, and that he neither ate lunch with nor saw Oswald.
Then he said, "Oh, I see," and that was all.
Prior attempt to kill.
General Walker gave this information to the police before the shooting, but it did not help solve the crime.
Although the bullet was recovered from Walker's house, in the absence of a weapon it was of little investigatory value.
General Walker hired two investigators to determine whether a former employee might have been involved in the shooting.
Their results were negative.
Until December 3, 1963, the Walker shooting remained unsolved.
In translation, the note read as follows: 1.
This is the key to the mailbox which is located in the main post office in the city on Ervay Street.
This is the same street where the drugstore, in which you always waited is located.
You will find the mailbox in the post office which is located 4 blocks from the drugstore on that street.
I paid for the box last month so don't worry about it.
However, I prefer that you hold on to my personal papers (military, civil, etc.).
James C. Cadigan, FBI handwriting expert, testified that this note was written by Lee Harvey Oswald.
Prior to the Walker shooting on April 10, Oswald had been attending typing classes on Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday evenings.
He had quit these classes at least a week before the shooting, which occurred on a Wednesday night.
According to Marina Oswald's testimony, on the night of the Walker shooting, her husband left their apartment on Neely Street shortly after dinner.
She thought he was attending a class or was on his own business.
When he came back I asked him what had happened. He was very pale.
I don't remember the exact time, but it was very late. And he told me not to ask him any questions. He only told me he had shot at General Walker.
It is clear that the note was written while the Oswalds were living in Dallas before they moved to New Orleans in the spring of 1963.
Oswald had apparently mistaken the county jail for the city jail.
Either the viaduct or the underpass might have been the "bridge" mentioned in the last paragraph of the note.
The county jail is at the corner of Houston and Main Streets, quote, right in the beginning of the city, end quote, after one travels through the underpass.
Marina Oswald stated that when Oswald returned home on the night of the Walker shooting, he told her that he had been planning the attempt for 2 months.
He showed her a notebook 3 days later containing photographs of General Walker's home and a map of the area where the house was located.
Two of these photographs were taken from the rear of Walker's house.
The Commission confirmed, by comparison with other photographs, that these were, indeed, photographs of the rear of Walker's house.
The third photograph identified by Marina Oswald depicts the entrance to General Walker's driveway from a back alley.
Also seen in the picture is the fence on which Walker's assailant apparently rested the rifle.
Oswald purchased the money order for the rifle on March 12, the rifle was shipped on March 20, and the shooting occurred on April 10.
Investigation determined that this photograph was taken approximately seven-tenths of a mile from Walker's house.
She testified that several days later Oswald recovered his rifle and brought it back to their apartment.
Firearms identification.
The Dallas City-County Investigation Laboratory tried to determine the type of weapon which fired the bullet.
The oral report was negative because of the battered condition of the bullet.
Frazier testified further that the FBI avoids the category of "probable" identification.
I am aware of their position. This is not, I am sure, arrived at without careful consideration.
I think is going overboard in the other direction.
Additional corroborative evidence.
The admissions made to Marina Oswald by her husband are an important element in the evidence that Lee Harvey Oswald fired the shot at General Walker.
Other details described by Marina Oswald coincide with facts developed independently of her statements.
He indicated that he wanted more people in the vicinity at the time of the attempt so that his arrival and departure would not attract great attention.
An official of this church told FBI agents that services are held every Wednesday at the church except during the month of August.
Marina Oswald also testified that her husband had used a bus to return home.
Oswald could have taken any one of several different buses to Walker's house or to a point near the railroad tracks where he may have concealed the rifle.
It would have been possible for him to take different routes in approaching and leaving the scene of the shooting.
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit librivox dot org.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 4. The Assassin: Part 8.
Another alleged threat by Oswald against a public figure involved former Vice President Richard M. Nixon.
I asked him where he was going, and why he was getting dressed. He answered Nixon is coming. I want to go and have a look, end quote.
He also said that he would use the pistol if the opportunity arose.
She reminded him that after the Walker shooting he had promised never to repeat such an act.
I called him into the bathroom and I closed the door and I wanted to prevent him and then I started to cry.
And I told him that he shouldn't do this, and that he had promised me.
I remember that I held him. We actually struggled for several minutes and then he quieted down. End quote.
She stated that it was not physical force which kept him from leaving the house. Quote, I couldn't keep him from going out if he really wanted to, end quote.
An investigation failed to reveal any invitation extended to Mr. Nixon during the period when Oswald's threat reportedly occurred.
When asked later whether it might have been Mr. Johnson, she said, quote, Yes, no.
I am getting a little confused with so many questions.
I was absolutely convinced it was Nixon and now after all these questions I wonder if I am right in my mind? End quote.
She stated further that Oswald had only mentioned Nixon's name once during the incident. Marina Oswald might have misunderstood her husband.
Mr. Johnson was the then Vice President and his visit took place on April 23rd.
Marina Oswald speculated that the incident may have been unrelated to an actual threat.
She said, quote, It might have been that he was just trying to test me.
Four marksmanship experts testified before the Commission.
Well, in order to achieve three hits, it would not be required that a man be an exceptional shot. A proficient man with this weapon, yes, end quote.
I consider it a real advantage, particularly at the range of 100 yards, in identifying your target.
It allows you to see your target clearly, and it is still of a minimum amount of power that it doesn't exaggerate your own body movements.
In accordance with standard Marine procedures, Oswald received extensive training in marksmanship.
During the first week of an intensive 8-week training period he received instruction in sighting, aiming, and manipulation of the trigger.
He went through a series of exercises called dry firing where he assumed all positions which would later be used in the qualification course.
Based on the general Marine Corps ratings, Lt. Col. A. G. Folsom, Jr.
He had the services of an experienced highly trained coach.
He had high motivation. He had presumably a good to excellent rifle and good ammunition.
As compared to a civilian who had not received this intensive training, he would be considered as a good to excellent shot. End quote.
After he left the Marines and before departing for Russia, Oswald, his brother, and a third companion went hunting for squirrels and rabbits.
Lee Oswald exhibited an average amount of proficiency with that weapon.
Oswald obtained a hunting license, joined a hunting club and went hunting about six times, as discussed more fully in chapter 6.
After Oswald purchased the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, he told his wife that he practiced with it.
Marina Oswald testified that on one occasion she saw him take the rifle, concealed in a raincoat, from the house on Neely Street.
Oswald told her he was going to practice with it.
According to George De Mohrenschildt, Oswald said that he went target shooting with that rifle.
The ammunition used by the assassin was manufactured by Western Cartridge Co. of East Alton, Illinois.
On the second series they required 5.15, 6.45, and 7 seconds.
None of the marksmen had any practice with the assassination weapon except for exercising the bolt for 2 or 3 minutes on a dry run.
They had not even pulled the trigger because of concern about breaking the firing pin.
The marksmen took as much time as they wanted for the first target and all hit the target.
For the first four attempts, the firers missed the second shot by several inches.
Five of the six shots hit the third target where the angle of movement of the weapon was small.
The others would have been able to reduce their times if they had been given the opportunity to become familiar with the movement of the bolt and the trigger pull.
Three FBI firearms experts tested the rifle in order to determine the speed with which it could be fired.
At 15 yards each man's shots landed within the size of a dime.
The shots fired by Frazier at the range of 25 yards landed within an area of 2 inches and 5 inches respectively.
Each series of three shots landed within areas ranging in diameter from 3 to 5 inches.
They were instead firing to determine how rapidly the weapon could be fired and the area within which three shots could be placed.
Frazier testified that while he could not tell when the defect occurred, but that a person familiar with the weapon could compensate for it.
Moreover, the defect was one which would have assisted the assassin aiming at a target which was moving away.
Frazier added that the scope would cause a slight miss to the right.
It should be noted, however, that the President's car was curving slightly to the right when the third shot was fired.
Based on these tests the experts agreed that the assassination rifle was an accurate weapon.
Simmons described it as, quote, quite accurate, end quote, in fact, as accurate as current military rifles.
With the equipment he [Oswald] had and with his ability I consider it a very easy shot, end quote.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 1.
The evidence reviewed above identifies Lee Harvey Oswald as the assassin of President Kennedy and indicates that he acted alone in that event.
There is no evidence that he had accomplices or that he was involved in any conspiracy directed to the assassination of the President.
There remains the question of what impelled Oswald to conceive and to carry out the assassination of the President of the United States.
None of these possibilities satisfactorily explains Oswald's act if it is judged by the standards of reasonable men.
The motives of any man, however, must be analyzed in terms of the character and state of mind of the particular individual involved.
Oswald's complete state of mind and character are now outside of the power of man to know.
He cannot, of course, be questioned or observed by those charged with the responsibility for this report or by experts on their behalf.
Under our system of justice no forum could properly make that determination unless Oswald were before it.
Perhaps the most outstanding conclusion of such a study is that Oswald was profoundly alienated from the world in which he lived.
His life was characterized by isolation, frustration, and failure.
He had very few, if any, close relationships with other people and he appeared to have great difficulty in finding a meaningful place in the world.
He was never satisfied with anything.
When he was in the United States he resented the capitalist system which he thought was exploiting him and others like him.
He seemed to prefer the Soviet Union and he spoke highly of Cuba.
He accused his wife of preferring others to himself and told her to return to the Soviet Union without him but without a divorce.
At the same time he professed his love for her and said that he could not get along without her.
Marina Oswald thought that he would not be happy anywhere, quote, Only on the moon, perhaps, end quote.
His wife testified that he compared himself with great readers of history.
Such ideas of grandeur were apparently accompanied by notions of oppression.
There was some quality about him that led him to act with an apparent disregard for possible consequences.
He defected to the Soviet Union, shot at General Walker, tried to go to Cuba and even contemplated hijacking an airplane to get there.
He assassinated the President, shot Officer Tippit, resisted arrest and tried to kill another policeman in the process.
Oswald apparently started reading about communism when he was about 15.
That associate did not think that Oswald was a Communist.
Oswald did not always distinguish between Marxism and communism.
He stated several times that he was a Communist but apparently never joined any Communist Party.
His attachment to Marxist and Communist doctrine was probably, in some measure, an expression of his hostility to his environment.
It was an obvious element in his decision to go to Russia and later to Cuba and it probably influenced his decision to shoot at General Walker.
It was a factor which contributed to his character and thereby might have influenced his decision to assassinate President Kennedy.
The discussion below will describe the events known to the Commission which most clearly reveals the formation and nature of Oswald's character.
It will attempt to summarize the events of his early life, his experience in New York City and in the Marine Corps, and his interest in Marxism.
Various possible motives will be treated in the appropriate context of the discussion outlined above.
Significant in shaping the character of Lee Harvey Oswald was the death of his father, a collector of insurance premiums.
This occurred 2 months before Lee was born in New Orleans on October 18, 1939.
That death strained the financial fortunes of the remainder of the Oswald family.
It forced Marguerite Oswald to go to work to provide for her family.
Marguerite Oswald withdrew Lee from the orphans' home and took him with her to Dallas when he was a little over 4 years old.
About 6 months later she also withdrew John Pic and Robert Oswald.
Apparently that action was taken in anticipation of her marriage to Edwin A. Ekdahl, which took place in May of 1945.
Lee Oswald remained with his mother and Ekdahl, to whom he became quite attached.
John Pic testified that he thought Lee found in Ekdahl the father that he never had.
John Pic, however, did not think her position was worse than that of many other people.
In order to supplement their income further she falsely swore that Pic was 17 years old so that he could join the Marine Corps Reserves.
Pic thought that his mother overstated her financial problems and was unduly concerned about money.
Lee was brought up in this atmosphere of constant money problems, and I am sure it had quite an effect on him, and also Robert, end quote.
Marguerite Oswald worked in miscellaneous jobs after her divorce from Ekdahl.
Despite their urgings, he refused to play with the other children his own age.
That was not the case, however, after he and his mother moved to New York in August of 1952, shortly before Lee's 13th birthday.
They moved shortly after Robert joined the Marines; they lived for a time with John Pic who was stationed there with the Coast Guard.
Relations soon became strained, however, so in late September Lee and his mother moved to their own apartment in the Bronx.
When Pic returned home, Mrs. Oswald tried to play down the event but Mrs. Pic took a different view and asked the Oswalds to leave.
Lee refused to discuss the matter with Pic, whom he had previously idolized, and their relations were strained thereafter.
He began to stay away from school, preferring to read magazines and watch television at home by himself.
This continued despite the efforts of the school authorities and, to a lesser extent, of his mother to have him return to school.
Truancy charges were brought against him alleging that he was, quote, beyond the control of his mother insofar as school attendance is concerned, end quote.
She recalled that Lee cried and said, quote, Mother, I want to get out of here.
Marguerite Oswald said that she had not realized until then in what kind of place her son had been confined.
Dr. Hartogs did find Oswald to be a tense, withdrawn, and evasive boy who intensely disliked talking about himself and his feelings.
He was reported to have said, quote, I don't want a friend and I don't like to talk to people, end quote, and, quote, I dislike everybody, end quote.
No finding of neurological impairment or psychotic mental changes could be made.
Lee has to be diagnosed as, quote, personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies, end quote.
Dr. Hartogs recommended that Oswald be placed on probation on condition that he seek help and guidance through a child guidance clinic.
There, he suggested, Lee should be treated by a male psychiatrist who could substitute for the lack of a father figure.
He also recommended that Mrs. Oswald seek, quote, psychotherapeutic guidance through contact with a family agency, end quote.
The possibility of commitment was to be considered only if the probation plan was not successful.
Lee's withdrawal was also noted by Mrs. Siegel, who described him as a, quote, seriously detached, withdrawn youngster, end quote.
She thought that he had detached himself from the world around him because, quote, no one in it ever met any of his needs for love, end quote.
Mrs. Siegel concluded that Lee, quote, just felt that his mother never gave a damn for him.
He always felt like a burden that she simply just had to tolerate, end quote.
He admitted to fantasies about being powerful and sometimes hurting and killing people, but refused to elaborate on them.
He took the position that such matters were his own business.
A psychological human figure-drawing test corroborated the interviewer's findings that Lee was insecure and had limited social contacts.
The Human Figure Drawings are empty, poor characterizations of persons approximately the same age as the subject.
They reflect a considerable amount of impoverishment in the social and emotional areas.
He appears to be a somewhat insecure youngster exhibiting much inclination for warm and satisfying relationships to others.
There is some indication that he may relate to men more easily than to women in view of the more mature conceptualisation.
He appears slightly withdrawn and in view of the lack of detail within the drawings this may assume a more significant characteristic.
He exhibits some difficulty in relationship to the maternal figure suggesting more anxiety in this area than in any other.
Lee scored an IQ of 118 on the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children.
According to Sokolow, this indicated a, quote, present intellectual functioning in the upper range of bright normal intelligence, end quote.
Sokolow said that although Lee was, quote, presumably disinterested in school subjects he operates on a much higher than average level, end quote.
Lee told Carro, his probation officer, that he liked to be by himself because he had too much difficulty in making friends.
The reports of Carro and Mrs. Siegel also indicate an ambivalent attitude toward authority on Oswald's part.
Carro reported that Lee was disruptive in class after he returned to school on a regular basis in the fall of 1953.
He had refused to salute the flag and was doing very little, if any, work.
He told Mrs. Siegel that he would run away if sent to a boarding school.
On the other hand he also told her that he wished his mother had been more firm with him in her attempts to get him to return to school.
The reports of the New York authorities indicate that Lee's mother gave him very little affection and did not serve as any sort of substitute for a father.
Furthermore she did not appear to understand her own relationship to Lee's psychological problems.
It may also be significant that, as reported by John Pic, quote, Lee slept with my mother until I joined the service in 1950.
This would make him approximately 10, well, almost 11 years old. End quote.
His usual reaction to the problems which he encountered there was simply withdrawal.
Those factors indicated a severe inability to enter into relationships with other people.
Carro was the only one of Oswald's three principal observers who recommended that he be placed in a boy's home or similar institution.
Carro testified that, quote, There was nothing that would lead me to believe when I saw him at the age of 12 that them would be seeds of destruction for somebody.
I couldn't in all honesty sincerely say such a thing.
There are indications that he has suffered serious personality damage but if he can receive help quickly this might be repaired to some extent, end quote.
Lee Oswald never received that help.
Such a placement was postponed, however, perhaps in part at least because Lee's behavior suddenly improved.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 2.
After his return to New Orleans Oswald was teased at school because of the northern accent which he had acquired.
He concluded that school had nothing to offer him.
His mother exercised little control over him and thought he could decide for himself whether to go on in school.
Neighbors and others who knew him at that time recall an introverted boy who read a great deal.
He took walks and visited museums, and sometimes rode a rented bicycle in the park on Saturday mornings.
Mrs. Murret believes that he talked at length with a girl on the telephone, but no one remembers that he had any dates.
A friend, Edward Voebel, testified that, quote, he was more bashful about girls than anything else, end quote.
Several witnesses testified that Lee Oswald was not aggressive. He was, however, involved in some fights.
Once a group of white boys beat him up for sitting in the Negro section of a bus, which he apparently did simply out of ignorance.
Another time, he fought with two brothers who claimed that he had picked on the younger of them, 3 years Oswald's junior.
Voebel took Oswald back to the school to attend to his wounds, and their, quote, mild friendship, end quote, stemmed from that incident.
Oswald erased those names, however, and indicated that he had no close friends.
Other evidence of the existence of such a disability is provided by the many other misspellings that appear in Oswald's writings, portions of which are quoted below.
Oswald started to read Communist literature, which he obtained from the public library.
One of his fellow employees, Palmer McBride, stated that Oswald said he would like to kill President Eisenhower because he was exploiting the working class.
Oswald praised Khrushchev and suggested that he and McBride join the Communist Party, quote, to take advantage of their social functions, end quote.
Oswald also became interested in the New Orleans Amateur Astronomy Association, an organization of high school students.
Despite this apparent interest in communism, Oswald tried to join the Marines when he was 16 years old.
This was 1 year before his actual enlistment and just a little over 2.5 years after he left New York.
He wrote a note in his mother's name to school authorities in New Orleans saying that he was leaving school because he and his mother were moving to San Diego.
In fact, he had quit school in an attempt to obtain his mother's assistance to join the Marines.
According to Marguerite Oswald, quote, Lee lived for the time that he would become 17 years old to join the Marines -- that whole year, end quote.
Oswald was motivated to join the Marines in large part by a desire, quote, to get from out and under the yoke of oppression from my mother, end quote.
His difficulty in relating to other people and his general dissatisfaction with the world around him continued while he was in the Marine Corps.
Other marines also testified that Oswald had few friends and kept very much to himself.
He did not rise above the rank of private first class, even though he had passed a qualifying examination for the rank of corporal.
While Oswald did not seem to object to authority in the abstract, he did think that he should be the one to exercise it.
He led them into discussions of foreign affairs about which they often knew less than he did, since he had apparently devoted considerable time to a study of such matters.
When the officers were unable to discuss foreign affairs satisfactorily with him, Oswald regarded them as unfit to exercise command over him.
Thornley added, quote, I think it was kind of necessary to him to believe that he was being picked on.
It wasn't anything extreme. I wouldn't go as far as to call it, call him a paranoid, but a definite tendency there was in that direction, I think, end quote.
Powers also testified that Oswald was reserved and seemed to be, quote, somewhat the frail, little puppy in the litter, end quote.
He had the nickname, quote, Ozzie Rabbit, end quote.
Oswald read a good deal, said Powers, but, quote, he would never be reading any of the shoot-em-up westerns or anything like that.
Normally, it would be a good type of literature; and the one that I recall was "Leaves of Grass," by Walt Whitman, end quote.
All the Marine Corps did was to teach you to kill and after you got out of the Marines you might be good gangsters, end quote.
Powers said, quote, now he was Oswald the man rather than Oswald the rabbit, end quote.
Oswald once told Powers that he didn't care if he returned to the United States at all.
At the court-martial hearing which followed, Oswald admitted that he had been rather drunk when the incident occurred.
He testified that he had felt the sergeant had a grudge against him and that he had unsuccessfully sought a transfer from the sergeant's unit.
He said that he had simply wanted to discuss the question with the sergeant and the drink had been spilled accidentally.
Governor Connally had just resigned to run for Governor of Texas, so he advised Oswald that he had forwarded the letter to his successor.
In that connection, it does not appear that Oswald ever expressed any dissatisfaction of any kind with either the President or Governor Connally.
Marina Oswald testified that she, quote, had never heard anything bad about Kennedy from Lee. And he never had anything against him, end quote.
But while we were in Russia he spoke well of him. Lee said that when he would return to the United States he would vote for him for Governor, end quote.
Oswald must have already learned that the Governor could not help him with his discharge because he was no longer Secretary of the Navy, at the time he made that remark.
Governor Connally's connection with the discharge, although indirect, caused the Commission to consider whether he might have been Oswald's real target.
Oswald could have shot the Governor as the car approached the Depository or as it was making the turn onto Elm Street.
As indicated above, Oswald started to read Communist literature after he and his mother left New York and moved to New Orleans.
I'm a Marxist. I became interested about the age of 15. From an ideological viewpoint.
An old lady handed me a pamphlet about saving the Rosenbergs. I looked at that paper and I still remember it for some reason, I don't know why. End quote.
He studied the Russian language, read a Russian language newspaper and seemed interested in what was going on in the Soviet Union.
I think you could sit down and argue with him for a number of years, and I don't think you could have changed his mind on that unless you knew why he believed it in the first place.
I certainly don't. I don't think with any kind of formal argument you could have shaken that conviction. And that is why I say irrevocable.
It was just -- never getting back to looking at things from any other way once he had become a Marxist, whenever that was, end quote.
And I remember his voice cracked as he said this. He was definitely disturbed at what I had said and I didn't really think I had said that much.
I never said anything to him again and he never said anything to me again, end quote.
Lieutenant Donovan testified that Oswald thought that, quote, there were many grave injustices concerning the affairs in the international situation, end quote.
Delgado testified that Oswald was, quote, a complete believer that our way of government was not quite right, end quote.
The eyes of the future became the eyes of God.
He was concerned with his image in history and I do think that is why he chose the particular method of defecting he chose and did it in the way he did.
It got him in the newspapers. It did broadcast his name out, end quote.
Thornley thought that Oswald not only wanted a place in history but also wanted to live comfortably in the present.
I think he would then throw himself entirely on the other thing he also wanted, which was the image in history.
I think he wanted both if he could have them. If he didn't, he wanted to die with the knowledge that, or with the idea that he was somebody, end quote.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Background and Possible Motives, Part 3.
He said living conditions over there convinced him something was wrong with the system, and that possibly Marxism was the answer.
On the other hand, at least one person who knew Oswald after his return thought that his defection had a more personal and psychological basis.
He wrote in another letter that he would, quote, never return to the United States which is a country I hate, end quote.
His idea that he was to find, quote, freedom, end quote, in the Soviet Union was to be rudely shattered.
Whatever Oswald's reasons for going to the Soviet Union might have been, however, there can be little doubt that his desire to go was quite strong.
Oswald had managed to save enough money to cover the expenses of his forthcoming trip.
Ask me and I will tell you I fight for communism.
I do not wish to be a part of it, nor do I ever again wish to be used as a tool in its military aggressions.
Happiness is taking part in the struggle, where there is no borderline between one's own personal world, and the world in general.
I never believed I would find more material advantages at this stage of development in the Soviet Union than I might of had in the U.S.
I have always considered this country to be my own. End quote.
Oswald told his brother, quote, on what terms I want this arrangement, end quote. He advised Robert that: 1.
In the event of war I would kill any American who put a uniform on in defense of the American government -- any American.
That my mother and you are (in spite of what the newspaper said) not objects of affection, but only examples of workers in the U.S.
Oswald met disappointments there just as he had in the past. At the outset the Soviets told him that he could not remain.
It seems that Oswald immediately attempted suicide -- a striking indication of how much he desired to remain in the Soviet Union.
I am shocked! My dreams! I have waited for 2 years to be accepted.
My fondest dreams are shattered because of a petty official. I decide to end it.
Soak fist in cold water to numb the pain. Then slash my left wrist. Than plunge wrist into bathtub of hot water.
Somewhere, a violin plays, as I watch my life whirl away.
I think to myself "How easy to Die" and "A Sweet Death, (to violins), end quote.
Oswald was discovered in time to thwart his attempt at suicide.
He was taken to a hospital in Moscow where he was kept until October 28, 1959.
Oswald went on October 31, to the American Embassy to renounce his U.S. citizenship.
Quote, I Lee Harvey Oswald do hereby request that my present citizenship in the United States of America, be revoked.
I have entered the Soviet Union for the express purpose of applying for citizenship in the Soviet Union, through the means of naturalization.
My request for citizenship is now pending before the Supreme Soviet of the U.S.S.R. I take these steps for political reasons.
He said that his Marine service in Okinawa and elsewhere had given him, quote, a chance to observe American imperialism, end quote.
I leave Embassy, elated at this showdown, returning to my hotel I feel now my energies are not spent in vain.
I'm sure Russians will accept me after this sign of my faith in them, end quote.
The Soviet authorities finally permitted Oswald to remain in their country.
No evidence has been found that they used him for any particular propaganda or other political or informational purposes.
They sent him to Minsk to work in a radio and television factory as a metal worker.
Oswald apparently resented the exercise of authority over him and the better treatment afforded to Communist Party officials.
He is reported to have expressed the conclusion that they had, quote, fat stinking politicians over there just like we have over here, end quote.
Oswald apparently continued to have personal difficulties while he was in Minsk.
I begin to feel uneasy inside, its true! End quote.
As my Russian improves I become increasingly conscious of just what sort of a society I live in.
Mass gymnastics, compulsory afterwork meeting, usually political information meeting.
I am increasingly aware of the presence, in all thing, of Lebizen, shop party secretary, fat, fortyish, and jovial on the outside.
He is a no-nonsense party regular.
I am stating to reconsider my desire about staying. The work is drab. The money I get has nowhere to be spent.
No night clubs or bowling alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances. I have had enough.
Oswald opened negotiations with the U.S. Embassy in Moscow looking toward his return to the United States.
His attempt to renounce his citizenship had been an open expression of hostility against the United States and a profound rejection of his early life.
The dramatic break with society in America now had to be undone.
His return to the United States publicly testified to the utter failure of what had been the most important act of his life.
Marina Oswald confirmed the fact that her husband was experiencing psychological difficulties at the time of his return.
She said that, quote, immediately after coming to the United States, Lee changed. I did not know him as such a man in Russia, end quote.
He was very irritable, sometimes for a trifle, end quote, and that, quote, Lee was very unrestrained and very explosive, end quote.
In general, our family life began to deteriorate after we arrived in America.
Lee was always hot-tempered, and now this trait of character more and more prevented us from living together in harmony.
Lee became very irritable, and sometimes some completely trivial thing would drive him into a rage.
This was a fairly coherent description of life in that country, basically centered around the radio and television factory in which he worked.
Immediately after serving out his 3 years in the U.S. Marine Corps, he abandoned his American life to seek a new life in the USSR.
After, however, 2 years and a lot of growing up, I decided to return to the USA.
He must be opposed to their basic foundations and representatives, end quote.
And yet, it is immature to take the sort of attitude which says, quote, a curse on both your houses! End quote.
One offers oppression, the other poverty. Both offer imperialistic injustice, tinted with two brands of slavery, end quote.
Oswald actually did attempt to formulate such an alternative which he planned to, quote, put forward, end quote, himself.
As a result he thought it would be, quote, necessary to oppose the old systems but at the same time support their cherished traditions, end quote.
The discussion above has already set forth examples of his expression of hatred for the United States.
There can be no sympathy for those who have turned the idea of communism into a vile curse to Western man.
With either great ambivalence, or cold calculation he prepared completely different answers to the same questions.
His second answer was that he, quote, went as a citizen of the U.S. (as a tourist) residing in a foreign country which I have a perfect right to do.
I went there to see the land, the people and how their system works, end quote.
I have never even know a communist, outside of the ones in the USSR but you can't help that, end quote.
Freedoms are about the same. Medical aid and the educational system in the USSR is better than in the USA, end quote.
In the second simulated transcript which ended with the statement, quote, Newspapers thank you, sir. You are a real patriot! End quote.
Oswald subsequently did subscribe to several Soviet journals.
While Marina Oswald tried to obtain permission to return to the Soviet Union, she testified that she did so at her husband's insistence.
In July of 1963, Oswald also requested the Soviet Union to provide a visa for his return to that country.
He sought an immediate grant of visa on his trip to Mexico City in late September of 1963.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Background and Possible Motives, Part 4.
In fact, his relations with some of them, particularly George Bouhe, became quite hostile.
He also expressed considerable resentment at the help given to his wife by her Russian-American friends.
Marina had a hundred dresses given to her, and he objected to that lavish help, because Marina was throwing it into his face.
He was offensive with the people. And I can understand why, because that hurt him.
He could never give her what the people were showering on her no matter how hard he worked -- and he worked very hard, end quote.
The relations between Oswald and his wife became such that Bouhe wanted to "liberate" her from Oswald.
Even though it appears that they may have left Oswald a few days before, it seems that he resisted the move as best he could.
De Mohrenschildt said that the whole affair made him nervous since he was, quote, interfering in other people's affairs, after all, end quote.
Oswald attempted to get his wife to come back and, over Bouhe's protest, De Mohrenschildt finally told him where she was.
If somebody did that to me, a lousy trick like that, to take my wife away, and all the furniture, I would be mad as hell, too.
I am surprised that he didn't do something worse, end quote.
After about a 2-week separation, Marina Oswald returned to her husband.
Bouhe thoroughly disapproved of this and as a result almost all communication between the Oswalds and members of the Russian community ceased.
Contacts with De Mohrenschildt and his wife did continue and they saw the Oswalds occasionally until the spring of 1963.
He first told his wife that he did not have a mother, but later admitted that he did but that, quote, he didn't love her very much, end quote.
When they arrived from the Soviet Union, Oswald and his family lived at first with his brother Robert.
The latter testified that they, quote, were just together again, end quote, as if his brother, quote, had not been to Russia, end quote.
He also said that he and his family got along well with Marina Oswald and enjoyed showing her American things.
Oswald and his family lived for a brief period with his mother at her urging, but Oswald soon decided to move out.
Marguerite Oswald visited her son and his family at the first apartment which he rented after his return, and tried to help them get settled there.
After she had bought some clothes for Marina Oswald and a highchair for the baby, Oswald emphatically told her to stop.
Oswald moved to Dallas on about October 8, 1962, without telling his mother where he was going.
He never saw or communicated with her in any way again until she came to see him after the assassination.
He visited some of his father's elderly relatives and the cemetery where his father was buried in an effort to develop the facts of his genealogy.
Oswald experienced some difficulty finding employment. Perhaps this was partially because of his lack of any specific skill or training.
Oswald obtained a job in July of 1962 as a sheet metal worker with a company in Fort Worth.
His performance for that company was satisfactory.
Even though he told his wife that he had been fired, he voluntarily left on October 8, 1962, and moved to Dallas.
He indicated, however, that he would have to delay that program because of his immediate financial needs and responsibilities.
Even though Oswald indicated that he liked photographic work, his employer found that he was not an efficient worker.
He also had difficulty in working with the other employees.
This was at least in part because of the close physical confines in which some of the work had to be done.
It appears that his discharge was hastened by the fact that he brought a Russian language newspaper to work.
It is possible that his immediate supervisor noticed the newspaper at that time because his attention had otherwise been drawn more directly to Oswald.
In any event, Oswald was discharged on April 6, 1963, ostensibly because of his inefficiency and difficult personality.
Oswald's employment problems became more difficult. He left his wife and child at the home of a friend, Mrs. Ruth Paine, of Irving, Texas.
After securing this job and an apartment, Oswald asked his wife to join him.
Mrs. Paine brought Oswald's family to New Orleans.
Oswald told his wife and Mrs. Paine that he was working as a commercial photographer.
Oswald apparently concluded that his Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities were not related to his discharge.
His Fair Play for Cuba Committee activities, however, made it more difficult for him to obtain other employment.
He consulted with his supervisor and, quote, it was determined that we should not undertake to furnish employment references for him, end quote.
As a result Oswald was not hired.
He subsequently found a job with the Texas School Book Depository for which he performed his duties satisfactorily.
The shooting occurred 2 weeks before Oswald moved to New Orleans and a few days after he had been discharged by the photographic firm.
As indicated in chapter 4, Oswald had been planning his attack on General Walker for at least 1 and perhaps as much as 2 months.
He outlined his plans in a notebook and studied them at considerable length before his attack.
He also studied Dallas bus schedules to prepare for his later use of buses to travel to and from General Walker's house.
He told his wife that he wanted to send the pictures to the Militant and he also asked her to keep one of the pictures for his daughter, June.
Following his unsuccessful attack on Walker, Oswald returned home.
He had left a note for his wife telling her what to do in case he were apprehended, as well as his notebook and the pictures of himself holding the rifle.
She said that she kept the note to use against him, quote, if something like that should be repeated again, end quote.
Answer: Yes. Question: And you said it was not a good idea to keep this book? Answer: Yes.
Answer: Yes.
Answer: It never came to me, myself, to ask him that question.
Marina Oswald's testimony indicates that her husband was not particularly concerned about his continued possession of the most incriminating sort of evidence.
Leaving the note and picture as he did would seem to indicate that he had considered the possibility of capture.
Possibly he might have wanted to be caught, and wanted his involvement made clear if he was in fact apprehended.
I asked him what for he was making all these entries in the book and he answered that he wanted to leave a complete record so that all the details would be in it.
I am guessing that perhaps he did it to appear to be a brave man in case he were arrested, but that is my supposition, end quote.
While there are differences between the two events as far as Oswald's actions and planning are concerned, there are also similarities that should be considered.
The items which Oswald left at home when he made his attack on Walker suggest a strong concern for his place in history.
Some idea of what he thought was sufficient reason for such an act may be found in the nature of the motive that he stated for his attack on General Walker.
Marina Oswald indicated that her husband had compared General Walker to Adolph Hitler.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 7.
Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 5.
Oswald's political activities after his return to the United States center around his interest in Cuba and in the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
April 6 to 24, 1963 Oswald's first public identification with that cause was in New Orleans.
Following his arrest, he was interviewed by the police, and at his own request, by an agent of the FBI.
Oswald had attempted to infiltrate an anti-Castro organization with which he was associated.
While Oswald publicly engaged in the activities described above, his, quote, organization, end quote, was a product of his imagination.
The imaginary president of the nonexistent chapter was named A. J. Hidell, the name that Oswald used when he purchased the assassination weapon.
She testified that he threatened to beat her if she did not do so. The chapter had never been chartered by the national FPCC organization.
He wrote that, quote, thousands of circulars were distributed, end quote.
Bringuier, who seemed to be familiar with many anti-Castro activities in New Orleans, was not aware of any such incident.
The Commission has not been able to find any other indication that Oswald had rented an office in New Orleans.
In addition, there is no evidence that he received any substantial amount of materials from the national headquarters.
New Orleans branch, end quote.
WDSU has no program of any kind called, quote, Latin American Focus, end quote.
Oswald's statements suggest that he hoped to be flooded with callers and invitations to debate.
Fair Play for Cuba was, quote, not at all Communist controlled regardless of the fact that I had the experience of living in Russia, end quote.
We figured after this broadcast of August 21, why, that was no longer possible, end quote.
Mr. Oswald handled himself very well, as usual, end quote.
Stuckey thought Oswald, quote, appeared to be a very logical, intelligent fellow, end quote, and, quote, was arrested by his cleancutness, end quote.
He did not think Oswald looked like the, quote, type, end quote, that he would have expected to find associating with a group such as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Stuckey thought that Oswald acted very much as would a young attorney.
Following the disclosure of his defection, Oswald sought advice from the Communist Party, U.S.A., concerning his Fair Play for Cuba activity.
The Worker replied, quote, Your kind offer is most welcomed and from time to time we shall call on you, end quote.
He later wrote to another official of the Worker, seeking employment, and mentioning the praise he had received for submitting his photographic work.
It is good to know that movements in support of fair play for Cuba has developed in New Orleans as well as in other cities.
Marina Oswald said that such correspondence from people he considered important meant much to Oswald.
He anticipated that the full disclosure of his defection would hinder him in, quote, the struggle for progress and freedom in the United States, end quote.
I should always remain in the background, i.e. underground, end quote.
Oswald had fallen on difficult times.
He had not liked his job as a greaser of coffee processing machinery and he held it for only a little over 2 months.
He had not found another job. His wife was expecting their second child in October and there was concern about the cost which would be involved.
His brief foray on behalf of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee had failed to win any support.
More seriously, the facts of his defection had become known, leaving him open to almost unanswerable attack by those who opposed his views.
Those events no doubt had their effects on Oswald.
By August of 1963, Oswald had for some time been considering the possibility of leaving the United States again.
As for my return entrance visa please consider it separately. End quote.
I only know that his basic desire was to get to Cuba by any means, and that all the rest of it was window dressing for that purpose. End quote.
He wanted to be arrested. I think he wanted to get into the newspapers, so that he would be known. End quote.
According to Marina Oswald, he thought that would help him when he got to Cuba.
He asked his wife to help him to hijack an airplane to get there, but gave up that scheme when she refused.
During this period Oswald may have practiced opening and closing the bolt on his rifle in a screened porch in his apartment.
In September he began to review Spanish.
He approved arrangements for his family to return to Irving, Texas, to live with Mrs. Ruth Paine.
Oswald left for Mexico City on September 25, 1963, and arrived on September 27, 1963.
He went almost directly to the Cuban Embassy and applied for a visa to Cuba in transit to Russia.
The Cubans would not, however, give him a visa until he had received one from the Soviets, which involved a delay of several months.
Oswald must have been thoroughly disillusioned when he left Mexico City on October 2, 1963.
The Militant also reflected a critical attitude toward President Kennedy's attempts to reduce tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It also dealt with the fear of the Castro regime that such a policy might result in its abandonment by the Soviet Union.
Oswald had expressed approval of President Kennedy's active role in the area of civil rights.
His unhappy experience with the Cuban consul seems thus to have reduced his enthusiasm for the Castro regime and his desire to go to Cuba.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 7. Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Part 6.
There is, of course, no way to judge what the effect of the general political ferment present in that city might have been, even though Oswald was aware of it.
On October 23rd, I had attended a ultra-right meeting headed by General Edwin A. Walker, who lives in Dallas.
As you can see, political friction between "left" and "right" is very great here.
Could you advise me as to the general view we have on the American Civil Liberties Union? End quote.
The relations between Lee and Marina Oswald are of great importance in any attempt to understand Oswald's possible motivation.
During the week, Oswald lived in a roominghouse in Dallas, but he usually called his wife on the telephone twice a day.
She testified that after his return from Mexico Oswald, quote, changed for the better.
He began to treat me better. He helped me more -- although he always did help. But he was more attentive, end quote.
Marina Oswald attributed that to their living apart and to the imminent birth of their second child.
She testified that Oswald, quote, was very happy, end quote, about the birth of the child.
His past relationships with his wife had been stormy, however, and it did not seem that she respected him very much.
They had been married after a courtship of only about 6 weeks, a part of which Oswald spent in the hospital.
Oswald's diary reports that he married his wife shortly after his proposal of marriage to another girl had been rejected.
In spite of fact I married Marina to hurt Ella (the girl that had rejected him) I found myself in love with Marina, end quote.
Marina Oswald expressed one aspect of her husband's attitude toward her when she testified that, quote, Lee wanted me to go to Russia.
Lee would say that it would be better for me if I went to Russia. I did not know why. I did not know what he had in mind.
He said he loved me but that it would be better for me if I went to Russia, and what he had in mind I don't know. End quote.
Many times Oswald has recalled this matter to me and said that I am just waiting for an opportunity to hurt him.
It has been the cause of many of our arguments. End quote. Oswald claimed that his wife preferred others to him.
The instability of their relations was probably a function of the personalities of both people. Oswald was overbearing in relations with his wife.
He apparently attempted to be "the Commander" by dictating many of the details of their married life.
Marina Oswald's inability to speak English also made it more difficult for her to have an independent existence in this country.
The difficulties which Oswald's problems would have caused him in any relationship were probably not reduced by his wife's conduct.
Mrs. Ford said that Marina Oswald admitted that she provoked Oswald on occasion.
There can be little doubt that some provocation existed.
Oswald once struck his wife because of a letter which she wrote to a former boyfriend in Russia.
In the letter Marina Oswald stated that her husband had changed a great deal and that she was very lonely in the United States.
She was, quote, sorry that I had not married him (the Russian boyfriend) instead, that it would have been much easier for me, end quote.
Oswald read the letter, but refused to believe that it was sincere, even though his wife insisted to him that it was.
Generally, I think that was right, for such things that is the right thing to do. There was some grounds for it. End quote.
The De Mohrenschildts also testified that, quote, right in front, end quote, of Oswald Marina Oswald complained about Oswald's inadequacy as a husband.
Marina Oswald also ridiculed her husband's political views, thereby tearing down his view of his own importance.
He was very much interested in autobiographical works of outstanding statesmen of the United States, to whom his wife thought he compared himself.
She said that she, quote, always tried to point out to him that he was a man like any others who were around us. But he simply could not understand that? End quote.
Jeanne De Mohrenschildt, however, thought that Marina Oswald, quote, said things that will hurt men's pride, end quote.
She said that if she ever spoke to her husband the way Marina Oswald spoke to her husband, quote, we would not last long, end quote.
Nobody said anything good about him. End quote.
She had, quote, the impression that he was just pushed, pushed, pushed, and she Marina Oswald was probably nagging, nagging, nagging, end quote.
She thought that he might not have become involved in the assassination if people had been kinder to him.
Mrs. Paine was planning a birthday party for one of her children on that weekend and her husband, Michael, was to be at the house.
Marina Oswald said that she knew her husband did not like Michael Paine and so she asked him not to come out that weekend, even though he wanted to do so.
She testified that he responded, quote, As you wish. If you don't want me to come, I won't, end quote.
Ruth Paine testified that she heard Marina Oswald tell Oswald about the birthday party.
Ruth Paine and Marina Oswald decided to call Oswald at the place where he was living, unbeknownst to them, under the name of O. H. Lee.
They asked for Lee Oswald who was not called to the telephone because he was known by the other name.
Marina Oswald thought he did so in order to emphasize his importance.
The claimed warning was one more of Oswald's fabrications.
I and my wife strongly protested these tactics by the notorious F.B.I., end quote.
On the other hand, the concern he expressed about the FBI may have been just another story to support the objective he sought in his letter.
After all, when will all your foolishness come to an end? All of these comedies. First one thing and then another. And now this fictitious name, end quote.
On Monday, November 18, 1963, he called several times, but after I hung up on him and didn't want to talk to him he did not call again.
He then arrived on Thursday, November 21, 1963, end quote.
Answer: He said that he was lonely because he hadn't come the preceding weekend, and he wanted to make his peace with me.
Answer: I was angry, of course. He was not angry -- he was upset. I was angry. He tried very hard to please me.
He spent quite a bit of time putting away diapers and played with the children on the street.
Question: How did you indicate to him that you were angry with him? Answer: By not talking to him.
He was upset over the fact that I would not answer him.
He tried to start a conversation with me several times, but I would not answer. And he said that he didn't want me to be angry at him because this upsets him.
On that day, he suggested that we rent an apartment in Dallas.
He said that he was tired of living alone and perhaps the reason for my being so angry was the fact that we were not living together.
That if I want to he would rent an apartment in Dallas tomorrow -- that he didn't want me to remain with Ruth any longer, but wanted me to live with him in Dallas.
He repeated this not once but several times, but I refused. And he said that once again I was preferring my friends to him, and that I didn't need him.
Answer: I said it would be better if I remained with Ruth until the holidays, he would come, and we would all meet together.
Answer: He said he would buy me a washing machine.
Thank you. That it would be better if he bought something for himself -- that I would manage. End quote. That night Oswald went to bed before his wife retired.
She did not speak to him when she joined him there, although she thought that he was still awake.
The next morning he left for work before anyone else arose.
No one will ever know what passed through Oswald's mind during the week before November 22, 1963.
Instead of returning to Irving on November 15 for his customary weekend visit, he remained in Dallas at his wife's suggestion because of the birthday party.
He had argued with her over the use of an alias and had not called her after that argument, although he usually telephoned once or twice a day.
He must have planned his attack at the very latest prior to Thursday morning when he spoke to Frazier.
There is, of course, no way to determine the degree to which he was committed to his plan at that time.
That fact was made precisely clear in subsequent news stories on November 19, 20, and 22.
Oswald had a highly exaggerated sense of his own importance, but he had failed at almost everything he had ever tried to do.
He had great difficulty in establishing meaningful relations with other people. Except for his family he was completely alone.
He could not keep them with him in Dallas, where at least he could see his children whom, several witnesses testified, he seemed to love.
The Commission does not believe that the relations between Oswald and his wife caused him to assassinate the President.
It is unlikely that the motivation was that simple.
Oswald's behavior after the assassination throws little light on his motives.
On the other hand, he could have traveled some distance with the money he did have and he did return to his room where he obtained his revolver.
Oswald was overbearing and arrogant throughout much of the time between his arrest and his own death.
He consistently refused to admit involvement in the assassination or in the killing of Patrolman Tippit.
He admitted nothing that would damage him but discussed other matters quite freely.
It is apparent, however, that Oswald was moved by an overriding hostility to his environment.
He does not appear to have been able to establish meaningful relationships with other people. He was perpetually discontented with the world around him.
Long before the assassination he expressed his hatred for American society and acted in protest against it.
Oswald's search for what he conceived to be the perfect society was doomed from the start.
He sought for himself a place in history -- a role as the "great man" who would be recognized as having been in advance of his times.
His commitment to Marxism and communism appears to have been another important factor in his motivation.
He also had demonstrated a capacity to act decisively and without regard to the consequences when such action would further his aims of the moment.
The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 1.
Abraham Lincoln, James A. Garfield, William McKinley, and John F. Kennedy.
This study has led the Commission to conclude that the public interest might be served by any contribution it can make to the improvement of protective arrangements.
However, all information considered by the Commission which pertains to the protective function as it was carried out in Dallas has been published as part of this report.
The protection of the President of the United States is an immensely difficult and complex task.
The nature of the protective assignment.
The President is Head of State, Chief Executive, Commander in Chief, and leader of a political party.
As the ceremonial head of the Government the President must discharge a wide range of public duties, not only in Washington but throughout the land.
As Chief Executive, the President controls the exercise of the vast, almost incalculable powers of the executive branch of the Federal Government.
As Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces, he must maintain ultimate authority over the development and disposition of our military power.
In all of these roles the President must go to the people.
Exposure of the President to public view through travel among the people of this country is a great and historic tradition of American life.
Desired by both the President and the public, it is an indispensable means of communication between the two.
From George Washington to John F. Kennedy, such journeys have been a normal part of the President's activities.
To promote nationwide acceptance of his administration Washington made grand tours that served also to excite interest in the Presidency.
During his Presidency, Franklin D. Roosevelt made almost 400 journeys and traveled more than 350,000 miles.
John F. Kennedy's journey to Texas in November 1963 was in this tradition.
It helped him in his job here, he was able to come back here with a fresh view of many things.
I think he felt very strongly that the President ought to get out of Washington, and go meet the people on a regular basis. End quote.
Whatever their purposes Presidential journeys have greatly enlarged and complicated the task of protecting the President.
If the sole goal were to protect the life of the President, it could be accomplished with reasonable assurance despite the multiple roles he must play.
But his very position as representative of the people prevents him from effectively shielding himself from the people.
He cannot and will not take the precautions of a dictator or a sovereign.
Under our system, measures must be sought to afford security without impeding the President's performance of his many functions.
The protection of the President must be thorough but inconspicuous to avoid even the suggestion of a garrison state.
The rights of private individuals must not be infringed.
If the protective job is well done, its performance will be evident only in the unexceptional fact of its success.
His travel would be in secret; his public appearances would be behind bulletproof glass. A more practical approach necessitates compromise.
Any travel, any contact with the general public, involves a calculated risk on the part of the President and the men responsible for his protection.
Nevertheless the procedures and advice should be accepted if the President wishes to have any security.
This section considers first the means used to locate potential sources of danger to the President in time to take appropriate precautions.
Finally, the performance of those charged with the immediate responsibility of protecting the President on November 22 is reviewed.
Adequacy of preventive intelligence operations of the Secret Service.
At the time of the assassination PRS was a very small group, comprised of 12 specialists and 3 clerks.
The total volume of information received by PRS has risen steadily.
Since many items may pertain to a single case, these figures do not show the caseload.
PRS received items in 8,709 cases.
These instructions to PRS personnel appear to be the only instance where an effort was made to reduce the criteria to writing.
The general files of PRS consist of folders on individuals, card indexed by name.
The files are manually maintained, without use of any automatic data-processing techniques.
A case file was established if the information available suggested that the subject might be a danger to the President.
Many of these cases were not investigated by PRS.
The case file served merely as a repository for information until enough had accumulated to warrant an investigation.
PRS investigated 34 newly established or reactivated cases concerning residents of Texas.
Most of these cases involved persons who used threatening language in communications to or about the President.
An additional 115 cases concerning Texas residents were established but not investigated.
At the time of the assassination there were approximately 400 persons throughout the country who were subject to periodic review.
In June 1964 PRS had arrangements to be notified about the release or escape of approximately 1,000 persons.
Members of the White House detail were expected to familiarize themselves with the descriptions and photographs of the highest risk cases.
The general files of PRS were not indexed by geographic location and were of little use in preparing for a Presidential visit to a specific locality.
Presidential protection was an important topic in these training programs.
Advise the Bureau at the same time by teletype of the information so furnished to the Secret Service and the fact that it has been so disseminated.
The above action should be taken without delay in order to attempt to verify the information and no evaluation of the information should be attempted.
The several military intelligence agencies reported crank mail and similar threats involving the President.
Its efforts appear to have been too largely directed at the "crank" threat.
PRS required a more direct indication of a threat to the President, and that there was no such indication until the President's scheduled visit to that area became known.
PRS should have investigated and been prepared to guard against it.
Other agencies occasionally provided information to the Secret Service concerning potentially dangerous political groups.
This was done in the case of the Nationalist Party of Puerto Rico, for example, but only after members of the group had resorted to political violence.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 2.
Information known about Lee Harvey Oswald prior to the assassination.
No information concerning Lee Harvey Oswald appeared in PRS files before the President's trip to Dallas.
Oswald was known to other Federal agencies with which the Secret Service maintained intelligence liaison.
The FBI had been interested in him, to some degree at least, since the time of his defection in October 1959.
From defection to return to Fort Worth.
The FBI opened a file on Oswald in October 1959, when news reports appeared of his defection to the Soviet Union.
Oswald's defection was also the occasion for the opening of files by the Department of State, CIA, and the Office of Naval Intelligence.
In June 1962, the Bureau was advised by the Department of State of Oswald's plan to return to the United States.
Oswald's file at the Department of State Passport Office was reviewed in June 1962.
The file reflected the Department's determination that Oswald had not expatriated himself.
From return to Fort Worth to move to New Orleans.
Oswald, quote, denied that he had ever denounced his U.S. citizenship, and that he had ever applied for Soviet citizenship specifically, end quote.
Agent Fain was not satisfied by this interview and arranged to see Oswald again on August 16, 1962.
Marina Oswald, however, recalled that her husband was upset by this interview.
Fain determined that nothing further remained to be done at that time and recommended that the case be placed in a closed status.
This is an administrative classification indicating that no further work has been scheduled.
It does not preclude the agent in charge of the case from reopening it if he feels that further work should be done.
Agent Fain retired from the FBI in October 1962, and the closed Oswald case was not reassigned.
Fain had been assigned to see Marina Oswald at an appropriate time.
This assignment was given to Agent James P. Hosty, Jr. of the Dallas office upon Fain's retirement.
Hosty considered the information to be, quote, stale, unquote, by that time, and did not attempt to verify Oswald's reported statement.
Hosty had inquired earlier and found no evidence that it was functioning in the Dallas area.
In New Orleans. In the middle of May of 1963, Agent Hosty checked Oswald's last known residence and found that he had moved.
The New Orleans office investigated and located Oswald, learning his address and former place of employment on August 5, 1963.
A confidential informant advised the FBI that Oswald was not known to be engaged in Communist Party activities in New Orleans.
On the next day, he asked the New Orleans police to arrange for him to be interviewed by the FBI.
The police called the local FBI office and an agent, John L. Quigley, was sent to the police station.
During the interview Quigley obtained background information from Oswald which was inconsistent with information already in the Bureau's possession.
Quigley advised Knack of his interview and gave him a detailed memorandum.
Knack was aware of the facts known to the FBI and recognized Oswald's false statements.
Several days later, the Bureau received additional evidence that Oswald had lied to Agent Quigley.
On August 22, it learned that Oswald had appeared on a radio discussion program on August 21.
Our interest in this man at this point was to determine whether his activities constituted a threat to the internal security of the country.
The FBI was advised by the rental agent for the Oswalds' apartment in New Orleans that they had moved again.
On October 3, Hosty reopened the case in Dallas to assist the New Orleans office.
He checked in Oswald's old neighborhood and throughout the Dallas-Fort Worth area but was unable to locate Oswald.
The Bureau had no earlier information suggesting that Oswald had left the United States.
The possible contact with the Soviet Embassy in Mexico intensified the FBI's interest in learning Oswald's whereabouts.
The FBI representative in Mexico City arranged to follow up this information with the CIA and to verify Oswald's entry into Mexico.
The Department of State did not advise either the CIA or the FBI of these facts.
West Fifth Street, Irving, Texas. After receiving this information on October 29, Agent Hosty attempted to locate Oswald.
On the same day Hosty interviewed neighbors on Fifth Street and learned that the address was that of Mrs. Ruth Paine.
He conducted a limited background investigation of the Paines, intending to interview Mrs. Paine and ask her particularly about Oswald's whereabouts.
Having determined that Mrs. Paine was a responsible and reliable citizen, Hosty interviewed her on November 1.
She said that Lee Oswald was living somewhere in Dallas. She didn't know where. She said it was in the Oak Cliff area but she didn't have his address.
I asked her if she knew where he worked.
After a moment's hesitation, she told me that he worked at the Texas School Book Depository near the downtown area of Dallas.
According to Hosty, Mrs. Paine indicated that she thought she could find out where Oswald was living and would let him know.
At this point in the interview, Hosty gave Mrs. Paine his name and office telephone number on a piece of paper.
Hosty assured her, through Mrs. Paine as interpreter, that the FBI would not harm or harass her.
Hosty took the necessary steps to have the Dallas office of the FBI, rather than the New Orleans office, reestablished as the office with principal responsibility.
On November 5, Hosty was traveling near Mrs. Paine's home and took the occasion to stop by to ask whether she had any further information.
Oswald had said that he was a, quote, Trotskyite Communist, end quote.
Well, as I had previously stated, I have between 25 and 40 cases assigned to me at any one time. I had other matters to take care of.
I had now established that Lee Oswald was not employed in a sensitive industry.
I can now afford to wait until New Orleans forwarded the necessary papers to me to show me I now had all the information.
Answer: No. I would have to wait until I had talked to Marina to see what I could determine, and from there I could make my plans.
Question: Did you take any action on this case between November 5 and November 22? Answer: No, sir.
The official Bureau files confirm Hosty's statement that from November 5 until the assassination, no active investigation was conducted.
Hosty received this information on the afternoon of November 22, 1963.
Nonreferral of Oswald to the Secret Service.
Agent Hosty testified that he was fully aware of the pending Presidential visit to Dallas.
He had made the same statement about a week prior at another special conference which we had held.
I don't recall the exact date. It was about a week prior. End quote.
In fact, Hosty participated in transmitting to the Secret Service two pieces of information pertaining to the visit.
Shortly after Oswald was apprehended and identified, Hosty's superior sent him to observe the interrogation of Oswald.
Hosty parked his car in the basement of police headquarters and there met an acquaintance, Lt. Jack Revill of the Dallas police force.
The two men disagree about the conversation which took place between them.
Revill testified that Hosty said also that the FBI had information that Oswald was, quote, capable of committing this assassination, end quote.
According to Revill, Hosty indicated that he was going to tell this to Lieutenant Wells of the homicide and robbery bureau.
Revill promptly made a memorandum of this conversation in which the quoted statement appears.
The only witness to the conversation was Dallas Police Detective V. J. Brian, who was accompanying Revill.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 3.
Hosty's interpretation of the prevailing FBI instructions on referrals to the Secret Service was defended before the Commission by his superiors.
Neither believed that the Bureau investigation of him up to November 22 revealed any information which would have justified referral to the Secret Service.
We talked to him twice.
He likewise indicated he was disenchanted with Russia.
We satisfied ourselves that we had met our requirement, namely to find out whether he had been recruited by Soviet intelligence. The case was closed.
We again exhibited interest on the basis of these contacts with The Worker, Fair Play for Cuba Committee, which are relatively inconsequential.
His activities for the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans, we knew, were not of real consequence as he was not connected with any organized activity there.
The interview with him in jail is not significant from the standpoint of whether he had a propensity for violence.
He gave evidence of settling down.
Nowhere during the course of this investigation or the information that came to us from other agencies was there any indication of a potential for violence on his part.
The formal FBI instructions to its agents outlining the information to be referred to the Secret Service were too narrow at the time of the assassination.
The handbook referred thus to, quote, the possibility of an attempt against the person or safety of the President, end quote.
FBI-agency community of interests, location of agency head quarters, and the responsiveness of agency representatives.
Each field office should determine those Federal agencies which are represented locally and with which liaison should be conducted. End quote.
The President's trip to Dallas called into play many standard operating procedures of the Secret Service in addition to its preventive intelligence operations.
Examination of these procedures shows that in most respects they were well conceived and ably executed by the personnel of the Service.
Advance preparations.
The advance preparations in Dallas by Agent Winston G. Lawson of the White House detail have been described in chapter 2.
Lawson was responsible for working out a great many arrangements for the President's trip.
The Service prefers to have two agents perform advance preparations.
The Commission concludes that the most significant advance arrangements for the President's trip were soundly planned.
Love Field and the Trade Mart.
The Commission also regards the security arrangements worked out by Lawson and Sorrels at Love Field as entirely adequate.
He did not have a checklist of the tasks he was expected to accomplish, either by his own efforts or with the cooperation of local authorities.
Agent Lawson's interim report was received by Agent Kellerman on November 20, the day before departure on the Texas trip.
Liaison with local law enforcement authorities.
The wholehearted support of these local authorities was indispensable to the Service in carrying out its duties.
The Service had 28 agents participating in the Dallas visit.
Fire Department, County Sheriff's Department, and the Texas Department of Public Safety.
Discussions with the Dallas authorities and requests made of them were entirely informal.
Agent Lawson agreed that such a procedure would assist him and other agents in fulfilling their responsibilities as advance agents.
Check of buildings along route of motorcade.
With the number of men available to the Secret Service and the time available, surveys of hundreds of buildings and thousands of windows is not practical.
In Dallas the route selected necessarily involved passing through the principal downtown section between tall buildings.
Similar arrangements for a motorcade of ten miles, including many blocks of tall commercial buildings is not practical.
Nor is it practical to prevent people from entering such buildings, or to limit access in every building to those employed or having business there.
This justification of the Secret Service's standing policy is not persuasive.
The danger from a concealed sniper on the Dallas trip was of concern to those who had considered the problem.
President Kennedy himself had mentioned it that morning, as had Agent Sorrels when he and Agent Lawson were fixing the motorcade route.
Admittedly, protective measures cannot ordinarily be taken with regard to all buildings along a motorcade route.
Levels of risk can be determined, however, as has been confirmed by building surveys made since the assassination for the Department of the Treasury.
An attempt to cover only the most obvious points of possible ambush along the route in Dallas might well have included the Texas School Book Depository Building.
Instead of such advance precautions, the Secret Service depended in part on the efforts of local law enforcement personnel stationed along the route.
In addition, Secret Service agents riding in the motorcade were trained to scan buildings as part of their general observation of the crowd of spectators.
If such instructions were in fact given, they were not effectively carried out.
All received their instructions early in the morning from Capt. P. W. Lawrence of the traffic division.
I stressed the fact that this was our President and he should be shown every respect due his position and that it was our duty to see that this was done.
End quote. Captain Lawrence was not instructed to have his men watch buildings along the motorcade route and did not mention the observation of buildings to them.
They had, however, occasionally observed the windows of buildings in the area before the motorcade arrived, in accordance with their own understanding of their function.
He was handicapped, however, by the fact that he was riding in a closed car whose roof at times obscured his view.
Lawson, also in the lead car, did not scan any buildings since an important part of his job was to look backward at the President's car.
The agents in the follow-up car also were expected to scan adjacent buildings.
Conduct of Secret Service agents in Fort Worth on November 22.
All of the agents stayed for a drink of beer, or in several cases, a mixed drink.
There is no indication that any of the agents who visited the Cellar Coffee House had any intoxicating drink at that establishment.
These agents were each relieved for a half hour break during the night.
Three members of this shift separately took this opportunity to visit the Cellar Coffee House.
Only one stayed as long as a half hour, and none had any beverage there.
President Kennedy was scheduled to speak across the street from his hotel in Fort Worth at 8:30 a.m.
In Dallas, one of the nine agents was assigned to assist in security measures at Love Field, and four had protective assignments at the Trade Mart.
The remaining four had key responsibilities as members of the complement of the follow-up car in the motorcade.
Three of these agents occupied positions on the running boards of the car, and the fourth was seated in the car.
Since he was convinced that this was not the case, he believed that it would be unfair to the agents and their families to take explicit disciplinary measures.
He felt that each agent recognized the seriousness of the infraction and that there was no danger of a repetition.
The Commission recognizes that the responsibilities of members of the White House detail of the Secret Service are arduous.
They work long, hard hours, under very great strain, and must travel frequently.
It might seem harsh to circumscribe their opportunities for relaxation.
Nor is this goal served when agents remain out until early morning hours, and lose the opportunity to get a reasonable amount of sleep.
However, there is no evidence that these men failed to take any action in Dallas within their power that would have averted the tragedy.
Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report. By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 4.
The motorcade in Dallas.
Rigorous security precautions had been arranged at Love Field with the local law enforcement authorities by Agents Sorrels and Lawson.
As described in chapter 2, the President directed that his car stop on two occasions during the motorcade so that he could greet members of the public.
The Presidential limousine.
The last Presidential vehicle with any protection against small-arms fire left the White House in 1953.
The Secret Service believed that it was very doubtful that any President would ride regularly in a vehicle with a fixed top, even though transparent.
Access to passenger compartment of Presidential car.
On occasion the Secret Service has been permitted to have an agent riding in the passenger compartment with the President.
Presidents have made it clear, however, that they did not favor this or any other arrangement which interferes with the privacy of the President and his guests.
The Secret Service has therefore suggested this practice only on extraordinary occasions.
At that time the agents on the framing boards of the follow-up car were expected to perform such a function.
However, these agents could not reach the President's car when it was traveling at an appreciable rate of speed.
Even if the car is traveling more slowly, the delay involved in reaching the President may be crucial.
It is clear that at the time of the shots in Dallas, Agent Clinton J. Hill leaped to the President's rescue as quickly as humanly possible.
Hill had both feet on the car and was climbing aboard to assist President and Mrs. Kennedy.
Planning for motorcade contingencies.
The Secret Service has consistently followed two general principles in emergencies involving the President.
All agents are so instructed.
Secondly, agents are instructed to remove the President as quickly as possible from known or impending danger.
No responsibility rests upon those agents near the President for the identification or arrest of any assassin or an attacker.
Their primary responsibility is to stay with and protect the President.
A number of steps are taken, however, to permit appropriate steps to be taken in an emergency.
A doctor is in the motorcade.
This basic approach to the problem of planning for emergencies is sound.
Any effort to prepare detailed contingency plans might well have the undesirable effect of inhibiting quick and imaginative responses.
Their actions demonstrate that the President and the Nation can expect courage and devotion to duty from the agents of the Secret Service.
Recommendations.
The Commission's review of the provisions for Presidential protection at the time of President Kennedy's trip to Dallas demonstrates the need for substantial improvements.
Many changes have already been made and others are contemplated, some of them in response to the Commission's questions and informal suggestions.
There was no Federal criminal jurisdiction over the assassination of President Kennedy.
Federal law enforcement officers is a Federal crime.
In 1902 bills passed both Houses of Congress but failed of enactment when the Senate refused to accept the conference report.
A number of bills were introduced immediately following the assassination of President Kennedy.
Such a statute would cover the President and Vice President or, in the absence of a Vice President, the person next in order of succession.
During the period between election and inauguration, the President-elect and Vice-President-elect would also be covered.
The governmental consequences of assassination of one of the specified officials give the United States ample power to act for its own protection.
At present, Federal agencies participate only upon the sufferance of the local authorities.
The Council already includes, in addition to the President and Vice President, the Secretaries of State and Defense and has a competent staff.
Major needs of personnel or other resources might be met more easily on its recommendation than they have been in the past.
The Committee would be able to provide guidance in defining the general nature of domestic and foreign dangers to Presidential security.
As improvements are recommended for the advance detection of potential threats to the President, it could act as a final review board.
The expert assistance and resources which it could draw upon would be particularly desirable in this complex and sensitive area.
This arrangement would provide a continuing high-level contact for agencies that may wish to consult respecting particular protective measures.
A Cabinet-level committee which is actively concerned with these problems would be able to discuss these matters more effectively with the President.
The assignment of the responsibility of protecting the President to an agency of the Department of the Treasury was largely an historical accident.
The Secret Service was organized as a division of the Department of the Treasury in 1865, to deal with counterfeiting.
The Commission believes that both the FBI and the Secret Service have too narrowly construed their respective responsibilities.
It was also suggested that it would take a substantial period of time for the Secret Service to build up the experience and skills necessary to meet the problem.
On the other hand, it is urged that all features of the protection of the President and his family should be committed to an elite and independent corps.
So circumscribed, it could not maintain the esprit de corps or the necessary alertness for this unique and challenging responsibility.
For more information, or to volunteer, please visit librivox dot org. Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy.
The Warren Commission Report.
By The President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Chapter 8. The Protection of the President. Part 5.
Daily supervision of the operations of the Secret Service within the Department of the Treasury should be improved.
The incumbent has no technical qualifications in the area of Presidential protection.
The Commission recommends that the Secretary of the Treasury appoint a special assistant with the responsibility of supervising the Service.
Actions by the Service since the assassination indicate its awareness of the necessity for substantial improvement in its administration.
A formal and thorough description of the responsibilities of the advance agent is now in preparation by the Service.
The Commission urges that the Service continue this effort to overhaul and define its procedures.
This involves tight and unswerving discipline as well as the promotion of an outstanding degree of dedication and loyalty to duty.
International Business Machines Corporation, and a panel of psychiatric and psychological experts.
Alan H. Belmont, Assistant to the Director of the FBI, testified that this revision was initiated by the FBI itself.
The FBI now transmits information on all defectors, a category which would, of course, have included Oswald.
They emphasized the necessity that the information now being furnished be handled with judgment and care.
The Commission shares this concern.
The suggestions of Federal agencies for revision of these guidelines were solicited.
It is questionable whether such criteria would have resulted in the referral of Oswald to the Secret Service.
I shall employ all means to right this gross mistake or injustice to a bona fide U.S. citizen and ex-service man.
The U.S. government has no charges or complaints against me.
I ask you to look into this case and take the necessary steps to repair the damage done to me and my family. End quote.
It is apparent that a good deal of further consideration and experimentation will be required before adequate criteria can be framed.
Liaison with other agencies regarding intelligence.
The Secret Service's liaison with the agencies that supply information to it has been too casual.
Detailed formal agreements embodying these arrangements should be worked out between the Secret Service and both of these agencies.
FBI, and the Secret Service.
Secretary Dillon testified that the use of such liaison officers is the only effective way to insure that adequate liaison is maintained.
PRS must develop the capacity to classify its subjects on a more sophisticated basis than the present geographic breakdown.
The Secret Service and the Department of the Treasury now recognize this critical need.
The Commission recommends that prompt and favorable consideration be given to this request.
The Commission further recommends that the Secret Service coordinate its planning as closely as possible with all of the Federal agencies from which it receives information.
The Secret Service should not and does not plan to develop its own intelligence gathering facilities to duplicate the existing facilities of other Federal agencies.
Protective Research participation in advance arrangements.
The Commission regards this as a most useful innovation and urges that the practice be continued.
However, the instructions must be communicated to the local police in any event and can be leaked to the press whether or not they are in writing.
Since the assassination of President Kennedy, the Secret Service has been experimenting with new techniques in the inspection of buildings along a motorcade route.
The Commission strongly encourages these efforts to improve protection along a motorcade route.
Chief Rowley testified that the present workload of each Secret Service agent averages 110.1 cases.
Chief Rowley explained that this would not provide enough additional manpower to take all the measures which he considers required.
Since the assassination, the Service has experimented with the use of agents borrowed for short periods from such agencies.
It has used other Treasury law enforcement agents on special experiments in building and route surveys in places to which the President frequently travels.
It has also used other Federal law enforcement agents during Presidential visits to cities in which such agents are stationed.
It may eventually be desirable to codify the practice in an Executive order.
The Secret Service in the past has sometimes guarded its right to be acknowledged as the sole protector of the Chief Executive.
This no longer appears to be the case.
Protecting the President is a difficult and complex task which requires full use of the best resources of many parts of our Government.
Recognition that the responsibility must be shared increases the likelihood that it will be met.
The Service should negotiate a memorandum of understanding with each agency that has been assisting it and from which it can expect to need help in the future.
The essential terms of such memoranda might well be embodied in an Executive order.
This Commission can recommend no procedures for the future protection of our Presidents which will guarantee security.
Why not relieve Newgate by drawing more largely upon the superior accommodation which Millbank offered?
But why should I repeat the whole?
But what are the feelings of those who take part in it?
The ward was one short of its number. What had become of the fellow?
The soldiers then?
Why not move the city prison bodily into this more rural spot, with its purer air and greater breathing space?
Did England hold to the gold standard when her reserves were threatened?
Has England gone back to the gold standard today?
Great Britain in many ways has advanced further along lines of social security than the United States?
How then could we proceed to perform the mandate given us?
What is my proposal?
Why was the age fixed at seventy?
What do they mean by the words "packing the Court"?
When before have you found them really at your side in your fights for progress?
But has the advance of biology simply tended to break down old distinctions without establishing new ones?
How, then, are they to be accounted for?
But how did the "mighty city" fall? How could Cyrus take Babylon whose walls were strong enough to resist any army?
How will thy disfigurement, thou simpleton, induce the enemy to yield one day sooner?
Did you ever have occasion to look at the President's back?
What the hell. I wonder what the hell is the uproar?
This should answer your question, and also give you a glimpse of my way of thinking. So you speak of advantages. Do you think that is why I am here?
After he brought the rifle home, then, he showed you the book?
Question: And then he burned the book?
Question: Did you ask him why he had not destroyed the book before he actually went to shoot General Walker?
Question: Did your husband give any reason for coming home on Thursday?
Question: Did you say anything to him then?
Answer: He tried to talk to me but I would not answer him, and he was very upset. Question: Were you upset with him?
Question: And how did he show that he was upset?
Question: What did you say to that?
What did he say to that?
Had you planned any steps beyond that point?
Question: This is the Quigley interview you are talking about?
